The following summaries of eligible CAO cases is adapted from [Oxfam Peru (Luis Yañez Quiroz)](https://peru.oxfam.org/sites/peru.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/OPPORTUNITIES%20AND%20MISSTEPS%20IFC%20INVEST.%20POLICY%20IN%20PERU.PDF):

*	**Yanacocha-01:** The Choropampa Defense Front filed a claim in December, 2000, in responseto the mercury spill of that year, stressing the impact of the accident on the health of thepopulation. The CAO organized meetings with each of the parties, and an agreement wasreached to undertake an independent health assessment. The recommendations werefollowed despite “numerous roadblocks” set by the Ministry of Health and civil societyorganizations. Finally, the CAO decided to close the case in November, 2003, citing the lack ofsocial and institutional support.

*	**Yanacocha-02:** In March, 2011, the Rondas Campesinas Federation (Rural Patrols) filedanother claim before the CAO on the Choropampa case, this time representing the localfarming communities that had suffered social and environmental impacts. In Septemberof that same year, the CAO threw its support behind the creation of a Roundtable for MultiSectorDialogue and Consensus. Over the course of four years this roundtable served as abridge between the community and Yanacocha. The claim was closed in March, 2006.

*	**Yanacocha-03**: With the previous case barely closed, in March, 2006, 30 users of thecanals came together to file a joint claim before the CAO. The claimants demanded greaterinformation on the potential impact of mining activity on the water levels of the rivers,canals, and streams surrounding the project area. Spaces were established for dialogue andexchange of information between the parties. The request was closed in August, 2006.

*	**Yanacocha-04:** In November, 2012, the CAO received a case from members of a family inCajamarca that claimed that the company never delivered the compensation they hadpromised in return for their grandfather’s land. The parties decided to resolve the conflictwith CAO mediation; after numerous meetings, however, no agreement was ever reached.Mediation came to a close in February, 2014, and in May, 2015 the CAO determined that nofurther investigation was warranted.

*	**Yanacocha-05:** Similar to the previous case, the Cerna Sánchez family came to the CAO witha case in May, 2013, claiming that Yanacocha had not provided any compensation for theirfamily’s land. No agreement was reached, and the CAO closed the case in May, 2015.

*	**Yanacocha-06:** An ex-worker from Yanacocha filed a claim with the CAO in February, 2014,questioning the termination of his employment. The CAO met with the parties on multipleoccasions, but the company chose to resolve the case through legal tribunals. The CAOclosed the case in May, 2015.

*	**Yanacocha-07:** In March, 2014, a family presented a claim related to the process of landprocurement and compensation at the Minas Conga project site. This family felt that uponselling their land, compensation would be recalculated if the mine project proceeded. Thecompany opted to resolve the case through their own channels of communication. The CAOclosed the case in May, 2015.
