# Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile

by Aaron Kyle Dennis and Gregory Eliyu Guldin <br />
Submitted to the World Bank 06 May 2013 <br />

Published by [The World Bank](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19739321/indigenous-peoples-russia-country-profile)<br />
© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank <br />
1818 H St., NW <br />
Washington, DC 20433 U.S.A. <br />
Telephone: 202-473-1000 <br />
Internet: www.worldbank.org/ <br />
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org <br />

**DISCLAIMER:** The official World Bank version of this report is available [via the World Bank website](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19739321/indigenous-peoples-russia-country-profile) in both [English](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19739321/indigenous-peoples-russia-country-profile) and [Russian](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19739260/indigenous-peoples-russia-country-profile). The World Bank granted CCCS permission to reproduce the report via the [Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.](https://www.copyright.com), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.

**Please note** that the version of the *Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile* published here differs from the official World Bank version. CCCS re-introduces content that was cut or omitted from our original version, and we correct for typological errors and other editorial inaccuracies introduction by the World Bank editorial team. We are also making public the associated datasets generated by our team when preparing the report.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


## Contents

**Acronyms and Abbreviations**<br/>
**Acknowledgements**<br/>
**Executive Summary**<br/>

**Part I.	Introduction**

<span>1.	Origin and Purpose of the Study </span><br/>
<span>2.	Methodology </span><br/>
<span>3.	Overview of Report Sections </span><br/>

**Part II.	A Brief Historical Review of Indigenous and Minority Issues in the Evolution of the Russian State**

<span>4.	Ethnicity in Historical Context: The Politics of Regionalism and Ethno-Nationalism Throughout the History of the Russian State </span><br/>
<span>4.1. Minority Integration in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union </span><br/>
<span>4.2. Ethnicity and Indigeneity in the Formation of the Russian Federation </span><br/>
<span>5.	The Emergence of a Modern Russian Concept of Indigeneity </span><br/>

**Part III.	Legal Contexts**

<span>6.	An Overview of Legal Protections for Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation </span><br/>
<span>6.1. The Federal Legal System and its Articulations with International Law </span><br/>
<span>6.2. The Federal Legal System and its Provisions for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples </span><br/>

Part IV.	Operationalizing World Bank Policy in the Russian Federation—A Problématique </span><br/>

<span>7.	Issues and Concerns in the Identification of Indigenous Peoples </span><br/>
<span>7.1.	The Category of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ under World Bank Policy </span><br/>
<span>7.2.	The Concept and Term ‘Indigenous Peoples’ within International Law </span><br/>
<span>7.3. Reconciling Russian Associations of ‘Minority Peoples’ and ‘Indigenous Peoples’ with World Bank Policy and International Law </span><br/>
<span>8.	Participation in the Developmental Process </span><br/>
<span>8.1. The Concept of Participation and its Limits: Issue of ‘Scope’ and ‘Applicability’ </span><br/>
<span>9.	Areas Requiring Special Consideration </span><br/>
<span>9.1. Lands and Related Natural Resources </span><br/>
<span>9.2. Commercial Development of Natural and Cultural Resources </span><br/>
<span>9.3. Physical Relocation of Indigenous Peoples </span><br/>
<span>9.4. Other Avenues for World Bank Developmental Assistance </span><br/>
<span>10.	Bank Experience Applying the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OD 4.20 and OP 4.10) in Russia </span><br/>
<span>10.1. Recent OP 4.10 Application in Russia </span><br/>

**Part V.	Key Issues and Opportunities to Promote Indigenous Peoples Development within the Russian Federation**

<span>11.	Developmental Preferences of Russia’s Indigenous Peoples and Associated Programmatic Recommendations </span><br/>
<span>11.1.	Protection of Rights to Land and Resources </span><br/>
<span>11.2.	Co-governance </span><br/>
<span>11.3.	Rights Awareness and Access to Justice </span><br/>
<span>11.4.	Benefits-Sharing </span><br/>
<span>11.5.	Cultural Survival </span><br/>
<span>12.	Recommendations to the World Bank </span><br/>
<span>12.1.	Support for Indigenous Priorities </span><br/>
<span>12.2. Increased Use of Technical Assistance </span><br/>
<span>12.3. Ensuring Indigenous Engagement with the Bank </span><br/>
<span>12.4. Further Research on Potential Application of OP 4.10 in Russia </span><br/>
<span>12.5. Engagement with the Private Sector </span><br/>


**Annex A.	Population Profile of Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation** <br />
**Annex B.	Map of Geographic Distributions of Indigenous Peoples Populationn** <br />
**Annex C.	Case Studies** <br />

Case Study 1: Building Indigenous Capacity: the Sakhalin Indigenous Minorities Development Plan [Russian Federation] <br />
Case Study 2:	Environmental Monitor Training Program [Canada] <br />
Case Study 3:	Demonstrating Customary Indigenous Land Use [Nenets Autonomous Okrug, Northwestern Russia <br />
Case Study 4:	Institution-Building for Northern Aboriginal Peoples in Russia (INRIPP-2) <br />
Case Study 5: Brazil Indigenous Lands Project <br />
Case Study 6:	 Regional Support for the Traditional Economy <br />
Case Study 7:	Carbon Trading to Preserve Indigenous Hunting Areas of the Udege Community ‘Tiger’ (Primorskii Krai, RF) <br />

**Annex D.	 Literature Cited**



## Acronyms and Abbreviations

|    |    |
|----|----|
|ADB	|Asian Development Bank |
|AO	|Autonomous Oblast (or Okrug) |
|ASSR	|Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics |
|CANSR	|Chief Administration of the Northern Sea Route |
|CCCS	|Cross-Cultural Consulting Services, PLLC |
|CERD	|Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination |
|CPS	|Country Partnership Strategy |
|CSO	|Civil Society Organization |
|EBRD	|European Bank for Reconstruction and Development |
|ECA	|Europe and Central Asia region of the World Bank |
|FPIC	|Free, Prior and Informed Consent |
|ICCPR	|International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) |
|ICERD	|International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination |
|ICESR	|International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights |
|IFC	|International Finance Corporation |
|IPO	|Indigenous Peoples Organization |
|IPP	|Indigenous Peoples Plan |
|IPPF	|Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework |
|KMNRF	|Small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation |
|KMNSSDV	|Small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East |
|MIGA	|Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency |
|MINREG	|Ministry of Regional Development |
|OD	|Operational Directive |
|OP	|Operational Policy |
|PS	|Performance Standard |
|RAIPON	|Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North |
|RF	|Russian Federation |
|RSFSR	|Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic |
|RTA	|Reimbursable Technical Assistance |
|TTP	|Territories of Traditional Nature Use |
|UDHR	|Universal Declaration of Human Rights |
|UN	|United Nations |
|UNESCO	|United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization |
|UNHRC	|United Nations Human Rights Council |
|USSR	|Union of Soviet Socialist Republics |
|WBG	|World Bank Group |
|WGIP 	|Working Group on Indigenous Populations |
|WIPO	|United Nations World Intellectual Property Organization |


## Acknowledgements

This Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile is based upon work commissioned by the World Bank as part of a nationwide screening process and country profile for indigenous peoples of Russia, starting in financial year 2012.

The report was prepared by Aaron Kyle Dennis and Gregory Eliyu Guldin of the consultancy Cross-Cultural Consulting Services, PLLC (CCCS), a private firm registered in the USA that specializes in working with international development institutions and private sector firms to devise collaborative partnerships with indigenous groups. The Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Far East and Siberia (RAIPON)—the preeminent Indigenous Peoples Organization of the Russian Federation—served as collaborating partner to CCCS for all stages of report preparation, with a particular responsibility for data review and enunciation of indigenous priorities.

The study was overseen by a core team led by Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO, World Bank), who provided comments and review for the report. Carolyne Makumi (ECSSO) provided support to finalize this report. The analyses, conclusions and opinions contained herein are solely those of CCCS. The content should not be construed as representative of RAIPON’s viewpoint, nor does it constitute World Bank-approved interpretations or recommendations.


# Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile
**PRELIMINARY SCREENING REPORT**


## Executive Summary

A popular saying holds that, “In Russia, everyone is indigenous.” Indeed, there is some truth to this statement, as most ethnic communities in today’s Russian state resided—*ab origine*—within its current territorial borders.  Many of these communities self-identify as both Russian citizens and as distinctive ‘peoples.’ Some maintain customary cultural, economic, social, and/or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society and culture. Some claim collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories and to the natural resources therein. Some speak distinctive languages. Thus, some ethnic and cultural communities within the modern Russian state largely correspond to the World Bank’s concept of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ as elaborated under OP 4.10.

Discussions of ethnicity in the Russian Federation are both complex and sensitive due in large part to historical legacies of state- and nation-building. As the Russian Empire expanded, it subsumed numerous, diverse peoples. During the Tsarist period, state policies focused on asserting state political and economic control over northern and eastern territories, but otherwise paid little attention to reforming or integrating traditional political institutions and subsistence systems of newly subjugated peoples—though in later years increasing pressure toward ‘Russification’ was extended via colonization. With the fall of the Russian Empire and the ensuing economic, social and administrative reforms instituted under the auspices of the Soviet Union, ethnicity developed into a central political issue—with sizable minority populations vying with the Central Government for territorial control and sovereignty. In contrast to previous eras, the modes of life of indigenous populations were forcibly changed during the Soviet period. Since independence, both minority and indigenous communities have had to re-negotiate their place within a multi-ethnic, multicultural Russia.<sup>[1]</sup>

The concept of indigeneity has also undergone a dramatic shift throughout the development of the Russian state. Prior to the Revolution of 1917 the peoples today classified as ‘indigenous’ were seldom referred to in state policy, except in general terms such as “stray persons of different origin” (бродячие инородцы;  *brodyachiye inorodtsy*) found in 1822 in the ‘Charter for the Management of Persons of Different Ethnicity.’  During the Soviet period, the terms “native peoples and tribes of the Northern regions” (туземные народности и племена Северных окраин; *tuzemnyye narodnosti i plemena Severnykh okrain*, 1920), “small peoples of the North” (малые народности Севера; *malyye narodnosti Severa*, 1930s-1940s), and “peoples of the North” (народности Севера; *narodnosti Severa*, 1940s–1980s), were used sequentially to define legal categories of peoples targeted for special state policy protections. With the post-Soviet (1993) *Constitution of the Russian Federation*, the concept of ‘indigeneity’ was introduced via provisions for “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples” (коренные малочисленные народы; *korennyye malochislennyye narody*). This legal category was later refined by the ‘Unified Register of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation’ (Единый перечень коренных, малочисленных народов Российской Федерации; *Yedinyy perechen’ korennykh, malochislennykh narodov Rossiyskoy Federatsii*) codified by the Government of the Russian Federation on March 24, 2000. This Unified Register enumerated a list of Russia’s culturally distinctive minority ethnic groups—a list that now comprises 47 ‘numerically small’ minority peoples, of which 40 inhabit territories belonging to Siberia, the Russian North or the Russian Far East. In the modern Russian state, official identification of ethnic groups as “Indigenous Peoples” is based on the following criteria:<sup>[2]</sup>

*	Living in the historical territories of their ancestors
*	Preserving their traditional way of life, occupations, and folk art [handicrafts]
*	Self-recognizing themselves as a separate ethnicity
*	Numbering at most 50,000 people within Russia.

Application of the World Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has increased in the Russian Federation over the last financial year as Bank activities expanded to the eastern and northern parts of the country, principally due to a forest fire response project in Khabarovsk and an education project in Yakutia. Application of OP 4.10 may continue to expand via Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) opportunities in those same eastern and northern regions. To assist in the Bank’s strategic development planning with the Government of the Russian Federation, the World Bank has commissioned this *Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile (Preliminary Screening Report)*.

This Country Profile has several aims. One is to provide Bank task teams with an understanding of some of the historical and political issues that are involved in making a determination to apply OP 4.10 and, if invoked, to inform them of some of the key concerns of Indigenous Peoples and the requirements of the Russian legal context that should be taken under consideration to enhance project sustainability. Other parts of the World Bank Group that apply *IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability*, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), also experience the need for in-depth understanding of the unique historical and legal situation of Indigenous Peoples in Russia. To assist these institutions as well, this Country Profile takes into account salient socio-political issues and discussions of legal contexts germane to Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation.  Another aim is to define a priority list of issues of particular concern to Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation that the Bank might reference as it continues to work with the Government of the Russian Federation to implement the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)’s *Theme 2: Expanding Human Potentials*. Finally, the report seeks to examine the possibility of going beyond safeguard project applications to include the use of RTA and other novel instruments at the sub-national level.

Overall, the socio-economic situation of Russia’s Indigenous Peoples is less than ideal. The cumulative effects of historical circumstances and current socio-political conditions aggravate existential threats posed to Indigenous Peoples including on-going degradation of their environment caused by resource exploitation, the relatively inferior state of their health, the rapid loss of culture, language and traditional knowledge, the impoverishment of indigenous rural populations and the profound environmental changes being brought about by global climate change. Yet it cannot be said that Russia’s Indigenous Peoples are opposed to development. The term ‘development’ can mean different things to different stakeholders; the Indigenous Peoples consulted for this report talked about development that balanced economic potential and resource extraction with ecological and cultural sustainability.

In implementing OP 4.10 in the multi-ethnic and multicultural Russian Federation and in the context of the broader development issues at the heart of the CPS, it is critical for the Bank to come to an understanding with the Government of Russia about which groups can be considered to be Indigenous Peoples for the purposes of the OP. In the context of Russian history and the legal system, the categories of “small-numbered peoples of the north” and “small-numbered peoples of the Russian Federation” have emerged to refer to groups that meet identifying characteristics defined in the OP. A case can also be made for applying the OP to other groups.

Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation have a wide range of special benefits and rights guaranteed to them, broadly paralleling the special considerations and requirements for participation and consultation called for in OP 4.10. However, these rights and benefits are not always attainable. Contradictory laws and regulations as well as a lack of enforcement can result in the denial to Indigenous Peoples of many of the rights and benefits to which they are entitled. Despite the Constitution’s emphasis on equality, democracy, and respect for international law, many Indigenous Peoples organizations maintain that the Constitution actually affords little space to Indigenous Peoples communities (as differentiated from individuals). As a result, Indigenous Peoples and their representative organizations tend to invoice international law—rather than Russian law—to substantiate community claims to specific rights and freedoms vis-à-vis conflicting laws and activities of central and regional state bodies. The outcome is a tension-ridden relationship between the state and indigenous communities.

The following five areas can be considered to be core developmental priorities of the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation:

*	*Protection of Rights to Land and Resources.* Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation desire coherence, consistency and certainty in regard to state legal formulations concerning their access to land and resources. They are also in need of assistance to obtain such access.
*	*Co-governance.* Indigenous Peoples seek the right to participate fully and effectively in the decisions that will affect their lives and livelihoods. They seek the widespread acceptance of this right, along with support for the creation of mechanisms guaranteeing this right that would allow them to be involved in the crafting of laws and regulations affecting them.
*	*Rights Awareness and Access to Justice.* Indigenous Peoples wish to have full access to information that affects their lives and livelihoods and to raise awareness in indigenous communities of the rights they are entitled to. In those cases where Indigenous Peoples are excluded from exercising their rights to participate in development processes, they wish to have access to effective—and legally established—forms of recourse.
*	*Benefits-sharing.* Indigenous Peoples desire fair and equitable benefits to project-affected indigenous communities based on just compensation for damages and impacts. Programmatically speaking, initiatives in support of education and access to health services are the most frequently cited community social needs. There is also an increasing awareness of the need for targeted gender-based initiatives.
*	*Cultural Survival.* Declining population sizes combined with increased acculturative pressures have brought some peoples’ very existence into question. Indigenous People are concerned about their ability to carry their culture to subsequent generations and hope to use any development initiative to advance that goal.

Based on the above review and analysis, responding to the strategic priorities of the CPS, and incorporating the inputs received from experts, CCCS makes the following recommendations to the World Bank:

*	*Support for Indigenous Priorities (CPS Objectives 8, 9, and 11).* To support indigenous priorities, the Bank might consider working with the Government of Russia, at both the federal and regional levels, to assist in the development of appropriate regulatory frameworks to extend protection of rights to land and resources and to enhance co-governance approaches. Capacity-building efforts could address the need for raising rights awareness and increasing access to justice, while programmatic initiatives could speak to benefits-sharing preferences and cultural heritage protection measures.
*	*Increased use of Technical Assistance (CPS Strategic Theme 2).* In discussions with both federal and regional governments, the World Bank can offer to extend Technical Assistance (TA)—as provided for  in OP 4.10 (paragraph 22)—to support initiatives to make the development process more inclusive of Indigenous Peoples and to raise the capacity of both local governments and indigenous communities to collaborate on development projects. Other TA possibilities include recognition of customary land tenure systems and establishing data baselines of indigenous communities focusing on traditional economic activities and making this information publicly available, for instance by posting it on the Internet (World Wide Web).
*	*Ensuring Indigenous Engagement with the Bank.* As a means of helping to ensure that developmental initiatives are devised with the active participation of Indigenous Peoples, the Bank would do well to engage representative Indigenous Peoples Organizations as interlocutors on projects affecting Indigenous Peoples communities.
*	*Further Research on Potential Application of OP 4.10 in Russia.* To alleviate some of the ambiguity surrounding the application of OP 4.10 in the Russian Federation, the World Bank Group and the Government of the Russian Federation need to come to an agreement on how to address groups that are not included under the ‘Unified Register of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation’ but which might still be classed as Indigenous Peoples under OP 4.10.
*	Engagement with the Private Sector. The World Bank Group should devise a unified approach to supporting corporate engagement with indigenous communities regarding projects that will affect those communities. This could include encouraging responsible private sector relationships with project-affected Indigenous Peoples through voluntary compliance with the provisions of IFC ‘Performance Standard 7 (Indigenous Peoples).’ Following on these initial developments, a new paradigm of community engagement with the private sector can be explored based on a dynamic three-way partnership between indigenous communities, local governments, and companies.


#### Footnotes:

* <small>[1]: Diatchkova, Galina. 2001. ‘Indigenous Peoples of Russia and Political History’ Canadian Journal of Native Studies 21(2): 217-233. Available online at: http://www2.brandonu.ca/library/cjns/21.2/cjnsv21no2_pg217-233.pdf ↩</small>
* <small>[2]: The criteria defining ‘Indigenous Peoples’ as such in Russia (the legal Russian term being коренные малочисленные народы Российской Федерации [*korennyye malochislennyye narody Rossiyskoy Federatsii*], abbreviated as “малочисленные народы”) is established in Article 1 of Federal Law of April 30, 1999 N 82-FZ ‘On the Guarantees of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation’ (as amended). Available at: http://base.garant.ru/180406/ ↩</small>


# Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile
**PRELIMINARY SCREENING REPORT**


## Part I.	Introduction

### 1.	Origin and Purpose of the Study

Application of the World Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples<sup>[3]</sup> increased in the Russian Federation over the last financial year as Bank activities expanded to the eastern and northern parts of the country. This occurred principally due to a forest fire response project in Khabarovsk and an education project in Yakutia, but policy application may also be required for Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA)<sup>[4]</sup>  opportunities in those same eastern and northern regions of Russia. In recognition that the application of OP 4.10 may continue to expand and to assist in the Bank’s strategic development planning with the Government of the Russian Federation, the World Bank commissioned this ‘Indigenous Peoples of Russia Country Profile (Preliminary Screening Report).’

This Indigenous Peoples Country Profile has several aims. One is to provide Bank task teams with an understanding of some of the historical and political issues that are involved in making a determination to apply OP 4.10 and, if invoked, to inform them of some of the key concerns of Indigenous Peoples and the requirements of the Russian legal context that should be taken into consideration to enhance project sustainability. Toward this end, this Country Profile reviews salient socio-political issues and discussions of legal contexts germane to Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation. This report also defines a priority list of issues of particular concern to Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation that the Bank might reference as it continues to work with the Government of the Russian Federation to enhance application of the policy and support implementing agencies. Toward this end, this Country Profile recounts some of the developmental priorities of Russia’s Indigenous Peoples themselves.  Other parts of the World Bank Group that apply IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability—the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)—also experience the need for in-depth understanding of the unique historical and legal situation of Indigenous Peoples in Russia to inform their application of Performance Standard 7 on Indigenous Peoples, which has similar triggers and safeguard requirements as those of OP 4.10. As IFC’s portfolio in Russia includes several projects in extractive industries with exposure to issues related to Indigenous Peoples, this report also seeks to provide broad forms of contextual analysis to informed cross-cutting concerns in safeguard application.

One of the final aims of this report is to respond directly to the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)’s *Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential*, and particularly its ‘Outcome 11: Socially Inclusive Development.’ Through provision of context, analysis and recommendations the report points to possible avenues for increased social inclusion of an important set of vulnerable groups in the Russian Federation.  Our recommendations intersect with other areas of strategic priority, including Outcome 9 (Education, Health, and Social Protection) and Outcome 10 (Skills for Economic Development). The report also recognizes the key role that gender mainstreaming needs to play in the Russian development strategy.  Furthermore, the report points towards possible Bank approaches beyond mere safeguard project applications to explore the applicability of Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) and other novel instruments at the sub-national level.

#### Footnotes:

* <small>[3]:  “Indigenous Peoples” is a contested term; see discussion below in sections 5 and 7.3 for an interpretation of the way this term is used in this report.</small>
* <small>[4]:  Falling under the category of non-lending activities, technical assistance comprises professional technical advice from the Bank that supports legal, policy, management, governance and other reforms needed to reach a country’s economic, social and poverty reduction goals. Bank knowledge and skills are used to help countries build accountable, efficient public sector institutions that can leverage financial assistance to sustain development in ways that will benefit their citizens over the long term. Bank experts offer advice and help governments in the preparation of documents, such as draft legislation, institutional development plans, country-level strategies, and implementation action plans. They can also assist governments to shape and/or put new policies or programs in place. Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) is referred to as fee-for-service (FFS) or fee-based services (FBS).  For more information on the use of Reimbursable Technical Assistance in the Russian Federation, see the 2011 position paper entitled, ‘Russian Federation: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)’,  available online at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/RUSSIANFEDERATIONEXTN/Resources/305599-1323702497877/ExecutiveSummary.pdf</small>


### 2.	Methodology

The basis of this Country Profile Report is a desk review of publicly available English and Russian language materials (analysis of secondary data). Some effort has been made to confirm report findings, including a questionnaire survey distributed to recognized experts in Indigenous Peoples issues in the Russian Federation. Also, a panel of invited stakeholders from government, civil society and academia was convened at the Moscow office of the World Bank on June 18, 2012 to discuss key topics and issues. Some of the attendees later served as peer reviewers for a draft version of this document. A final working group meeting to review the outcomes of this report and the case-study annexes was convened at the Moscow office of the World Bank 02 April, 2013.


### 3.	Overview of Report Sections

Part II of this ‘Country Profile’ provides the historical context for the emergence of minority and indigenous issues in Russia including the concept of indigeneity in the Russian state.

Part III describes legal protections provided for Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation, including national and international laws and policy frameworks.

Part IV establishes a problématique of the Russian legal system with regard to application of  World Bank OP 4.10.  This section first explicates differences in the the identification of “Indigenous Peoples” within the Russian state system as compared to approaches under Bank policy and international law. It then describes and contrasts safeguard provisions of OP 4.10 with their counterparts in the Russian legal/regulatory environment, inlcuing the standard for the participation of Indigenous Peoples in the development process and the ‘special considerations’ (Lands and Related Natural Resources; Commercial Development of Natural and Cultural Resources; Physical Relocation of Indigenous Peoples; Other Avenues for World Bank Developmental Assistance) provided for in the Operational Policy.

Part V describes national-level developmental priorities of the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation as discerned during the preparation of the Country Profile. This section relies heavily on inputs from the Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East (RAIPON). The section also includes summary recommendations to the World Bank for extending development opportunities in Russian contexts.

The annexes provide comparative data on the circumstances and locations of individual indigenous groups in Russia.



## Part II.    A Brief Historical Review of Indigenous and Minority Issues in the Evolution of the Russian State

A popular saying holds that, “in Russia, everyone is indigenous.”  Indeed, there is some truth to this statement. Most ethnic communities in today’s Russian state resided—*ab origine*—within its current territorial borders.<sup>[5]</sup>  Many of these communities self-identify as both Russian citizens and as distinctive ‘peoples.’ Some maintain customary cultural, economic, social, and/or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society and culture, and some claim collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories and to the natural resources in these habitats and territories. Some also speak their own languages. Thus, there is a wealth of distinctive ethnic and cultural communities within the modern Russian state that largely correspond to the World Bank’s concept of Indigenous Peoples as elaborated under OP 4.10.

By Russian Federation legal and regulatory standards, however, only a small subset of the ethnic peoples comprising the state counts as Indigenous Peoples. Before delving further into an analysis of opportunities for the World Bank to consider extending application of its policy on Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation, it is therefore important to start by engaging with the question: *Who is indigenous*?

To this end, historical context is important, for it helps to establish the sensitivity of the concept of ethnicity in Russian socio-politics and to orient the outside observer to the historical depth of inter-ethnic tensions and political struggles. It also explains the emergence of the particular Russian differentiation of Indigenous Peoples from other minority ethnic groups according to population size (a point that will be treated in greater length in Part II §5).


#### Footnotes:

* <small>[5]: The Russian State similarly is very strong in asserting that all people living in Russia are indigenous. In the key document, On the Concept of Sustainable Development of the Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation, the very first paragraph states that ‘most ethnic groups living in the country were composed as ethnic entities on the territory of Russia and in this sense they are indigenous people that have played a historic role in establishing the Russian state.’</small>


### 4.	Ethnicity in Historical Context: The Politics of Regionalism and Ethno-Nationalism Throughout the History of the Russian State

As this section will detail, the current complexity and sensitivity of ethnicity in the Russian Federation is predicated on historical dynamics of state- and nation-building. As the Russian Empire expanded, it brought under Russian state control numerous diverse peoples. Throughout most of the Tsarist period, the concept of indigenity was non-existent and was instead subsumed within more general state policies differentiating primarily between Russian and non-Russian populations (though some recognition was made of the special circumstances of northern indigenous groups). Throughout most of this period, political and economic control of northern and eastern territories was the primary concern of the Russian state, while traditional indigenous political institutions and subsistence systems were preserved—though in later years increasing pressure toward ‘Russification’ was extended via colonization.

With the fall of the Russian Empire and the ensuing economic, social and administrative reforms instituted under the auspices of the Soviet Union, ethnicity became a central political issue—with sizeable minority populations vying with the central government for territorial control and sovereignty. In contrast to previous eras, the modes of life of indigenous populations were forcibly changed during the Soviet period.

Since independence, both minority and indigenous communities have had to re-negotiate their place within a multi-ethnic, multicultural Russia. The post-Soviet period can be characterized by (relatively) more democratic methods of governance and a renaissance of traditional cultures of Indigenous Peoples and other small nations, though only within a still limited political and economic space opened by the Government of the Russian Federation.<sup>[6]</sup>

The next section of this Report will focus on the period of the Russian Empire through the Soviet Union, followed by a separate discussion of ethnic politics and Indigenous Peoples issues in the post-Soviet Russian Federation.


#### Footnotes:

* <small>[6]: Diatchkova, Galina. 2001. ‘Indigenous Peoples of Russia and Political History,’ Canadian Journal of Native Studies 21(2): 217-233. Available online at: http://www2.brandonu.ca/library/cjns/21.2/cjnsv21no2_pg217-233.pdf</small>


#### 4.1. Minority Integration in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union

The integration of minority nationalities with the Russian state has its historical antecedents in the Russian Empire (Российская Империя; *Rossiyskaya Imperiya*)—and even the Tsardom of Russia (Русское царство; *Russkoye tsarstvo*)—as state rulers and their governments sought to extend their territorial control and power. While the policies of these régimes toward the various populations that they subjugated oscillated between greater and lesser degrees of intervention in economics and governance, Russian state interference in social and cultural practices was relatively limited in scope throughout this period.

By some accounts, colonization of indigenous and minority populations of the territories comprising present-day Russia began in the 13th century in the northern part of what is known today as European Russia when the Saami were the first people to pay levies to the state of Novgorod.<sup>[7]</sup> More intensive efforts at state expansion were undertaken from the mid-16th century onward.
It should be noted that at the time of first encounter, the indigenous and minority populations already had well-developed communities, economies and cultures. The indigenous populations of the North, Siberia and the Far East had specially-adapted livelihoods based on a nomadic or semi-nomadic way of life, of fishing, hunting, and/or reindeer herding<sup>[8]</sup> and complex forms of social organization and governance to regulate their societies.<sup>[9, 10]</sup>  In this period, especially state (Tsarist) policy was to not interfere with these systems, nor to worry whether the diverse ethnic subjects self-identified as independent peoples rather than as part of a collective ‘Russian’ cultural community—provided they recognized the administrative dominion of the Russian state (that is, the authority of the Tsar) and were prepared to remit tributes.<sup>[11]</sup>

Even so, interaction between Russian and non-Russian peoples continued to increase throughout this early period due to various political interests, including military expeditions to further expand the eastern territories. This ultimately led to the construction of well-fenced towns and the collection of levies. At the time, the main governing body charged with authority over non-Russian populations was the Siberian Department (established in 1637).

Russian peasants started to settle in Siberia in increasing numbers by the early 19th century. As settlers and aboriginal peoples entered into commercial relations, the Russian state began to realize the necessity of establishing legal regulations and judicial bodies, as well as the need to define the status of the non-Russian population.<sup>[12]</sup> The Act of 1822 was devised to respond to this need.<sup>[13]</sup> It sought to both preserve the traditional administration and economy of indigenous populations, while also attempting to prohibit Russians from settling in the area of clan communities without asking their permission. Hiring manpower was allowed "with the consent of clan administration." The importation and sale of liquor was strictly forbidden.<sup>[14]</sup>

Yet shortly thereafter, in the 1830s, Russian imperial authorities also started promoting the concept of a unified ‘Russian’ national identity—a project that included efforts to convert minority religious groups to Orthodoxy (especially Muslim Tatars). This initial drive for ‘Russification’ (русификация; *rusifikatsiya*)<sup>[15]</sup> led to civil unrest and was subsequently moderated, but it regained momentum later on after the November Uprising of partitioned Poland 1831 and especially after the Russian defeat in the Crimean War in 1856, the Polish rebellion of 1861, and the January Uprising of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1863.

One response to the imperial ‘Russification’ project was heightened national sentiment among many of the minority populations in the Russian Empire.<sup>[16]</sup> In the build-up to the the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks leveraged this sentiment to develop pacts with leading ethnic groups that traded promises of territorial advantage in return for political allegiance. Following the triumph of the Soviet forces in the years following, the concepts of ethnicity and territoriality (ethno-regionalism) took on an entirely new form as the various peoples previously subjugated under the Russian Empire sought to define a new multi-ethnic and multi-confessional state.  The practice of granting ethno-territorial autonomy (that is, ‘nation’ status) to leading ethnic groups was institutionalized as an organizing principle of the Soviet state, but the definition of how such ‘nations’ would be constituted became politically charged. Joseph Stalin’s (1913) *Marxism and the National Question*, the cornerstone of the Soviet policy towards nationalities, defined a nation as ‘a historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life, and psychological makeup manifested in a common culture.’<sup>[17]</sup> Yet many of the subject nationalities or communities of the former Russian Empire did not fully meet these criteria for reasons of cultural, linguistic, religious and tribal diversity. Other groups lacked a political consciousness articulated on the basis of ethnic unity.  Throughout the subsequent evolution of Russian state administration, ethnicity remained a salient political concern.

On 15 November 1917, the Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia was adopted by the Bolshevik government. The Declaration recognized equality and sovereignty of all the peoples of Russia; their right for free self-determination, up to and including secession and creation of an independent state; freedom of religion; and free development of national minorities and ethnic groups on the territory of Russia.<sup>[18]</sup>  This position was re-confirmed by the Constitution of 1918. Thus, the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian North acquired equal rights with the other ethnic groups of Russia. Also worth noting is the ‘Decree of the Government On the Preliminary Protection of Indigenous Tribes’ of 1923, which established a category of people, “natives of the north,” who were in need of special state protection, banned the import of alcohol to areas of permanent inhabitation by northern Indigenous Peoples, and introduced a state monopoly on the fur trade, along with other measures.<sup>[19]</sup>

After the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR, also ‘Soviet Union’) was formally established in 1922 as a federation of nationalities within the boundaries of the former Russian Empire, the Bolshevik government began the process of ‘national-territorial delimitation’ (национально-территориальное размежевание; *natsional'no-territorial'noye razmezhevaniye*). This process cemented the concept of ‘nationalities’ via officially sanctioned territorial definitions in which ethnographers and ethnographic knowledge played a significant role.<sup>[20, 21]</sup>  Eventually, the USSR came to encompass 15 major national territories, each organized as a Union-level republic (Soviet Socialist Republic or SSR). All 15 national republics, created between 1917 and 1940, had constitutionally equal rights and equal standing in the formal structure of state power. The largest of the 15 republics was the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, (RSFSR, that is, ‘Russia’), which, albeit predominantly comprised of ethnic Russians, was also ethnically the most diverse—hence ‘a federation within a federation.’

In the early 1920s, the Russian SFSR was administratively partitioned into autonomous ethnic territories,<sup>[22]</sup> referred to as Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics (ASSR) and Autonomous Oblasts (AO)—many of which exist to this day as ethnic republics within the Russian Federation. Following the general policy of granting ‘national territories’ to all ethnic groups, numerous lower-level administrative territorial divisions were also created. The larger of these units were the republics (республика; respublika), named after the ethnic groups originally thought to form the mainstream society of a given territory—the so-called “titular nations” (титульная нация; *titul’naya natsiya*) of the Yakuts in the Sakha Republic (Yakutia), the Bashkirians in the Bashkirian Republic and the Tuvinians in the Republic of Tuva. The republics were extended varying degrees of governing autonomy.<sup>[23]</sup> Areas with relatively large population ratios of aboriginal people in sparsely populated regions were recognized as ‘national okrugs’ (now ‘autonomous okrugs’)—some of which also included titular nations, such as the Chukchi in the Chukotkan AO and the Evenks in the Evenkian AO.  Yet the ethnic peoples after whom these territorial administrative units were named never constituted a majority population and were still considered “national minorities” (национальные меньшинства; *natsional'nyye men'shinstva*)<sup>[24, 25]</sup> Apart from national republics, oblasts, and okrugs, several hundred national districts were also established (population 10,000-50,000) and several thousand national townships (population 500-5,000). However, although the first population census of the USSR in 1926 reported that the state was constituted of 176 distinct nationalities,<sup>[26]</sup> and despite the general policy of granting national territories to all ethnic groups, several nationalities remained without their own territories. The peoples of the North, as a prominent example, had neither autonomous republics nor autonomous oblasts. This situation began to change first in the 1930s with the creation of 10 national/autonomous areas for Indigenous Peoples and local tribal governments, including the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, the Koryak Autonomous Okrug, and the Nenets Autonomous Okrug.<sup>[27]</sup>

It is from this context that the modern category of Indigenous Peoples first began to take shape as distinct from other ‘minority nationalities.’ Recognized as being vulnerable particularly for their small size and dependency on traditional economic activities of fishing, hunting and reindeer herding, in 1926 the Central Executive Committee issued a *Decree on the Establishment of Interim Regulations for the Management of Indigenous Tribes of the Northern Periphery of the RSFSR*,<sup>[28]</sup> identifying 26 Indigenous Peoples (туземных народностей; *tuzemnykh narodnostey*).<sup>[29]</sup>

During this period, scholars and politicians proposed two alternative approaches to the development of the Indigenous Peoples:<sup>[30]</sup>

1.	The ‘Traditionalist’ or ‘Native’ approach emphasized the importance of preserving the culture of the northern Indigenous Peoples and proposed that contacts with the newly arrived population be minimized.  Some proponents of this approach also advocated for the creation of ‘reserved’ areas similar to those existing in Western countries (that is, the United States of America).<sup>[31]</sup>
2.	The ‘Innovative’ or ‘Integrative’ approach argued for the rapid and radical integration of the northern Indigenous Peoples into the culture of other peoples of Russia and their adoption of socialist values.

At first, the ‘traditionalist’ policy was followed. Under the *Decree of the Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee* dated 20 June 1924, the Committee of the North<sup>[32]</sup> was set up to attend to the “problems” of the indigenous population.<sup>[33]</sup> Immediate steps were taken to “assist” these specially recognized indigenous populations (Bartels, 1986:7). Exemptions from taxation and conscription were codified, along with a law requiring that Native people, including Native women, be included in courts of the people (Bartels, 1986:12). "Culture bases" were also established, where cinemas, cooperatives, clinics, and libraries were located (Bartels, 1986:12).<sup>[34]</sup>  One should note that the policies of the early 1920s that aimed at the development of indigenous cultures and economies by means of limited partnership and slow-paced reform, while relatively benign, still reflected a common perception that Indigenous Peoples were backward (отсталый; *otstalye*) and had to be ‘saved’ from their ‘primitiveness.’

In the late 1920s and early 1930s, political sentiment shifted in support of the ‘innovative’ or ‘integrative’ approach, as the political decision was made that the whole society had to move quicker along the road to “true” socialism and eventual communism. The Committee of the North was disbanded in 1934, and in 1935, power over Northern Affairs was assumed by the Chief Administration of the Northern Sea Route (CANSR).<sup>[35]</sup> The earlier toleration of the Russian state for the quasi-independence of indigenous societies was replaced with forced integration. All the trappings of ‘primitive communism’—animism, shamanism, rituals and ceremonies, the *chum* and *yaranga*, native languages, etc.—were to be reformed by socialist principles and industrial development. Collectivization became the major factor of reorganizing traditional economy and social life. Centralized settlements with modern houses, schools, and hospitals would replace the nomadic and semi-nomadic life-styles of the Indigenous Peoples.<sup>[36]</sup> Along with the larger economy of the entire Soviet Union, the means of production were socialized—whether farmland or reindeer herds—transforming customary subsistence systems.<sup>[37, 38]</sup>  Household-based family relations gave way to collective farms (колхозы; *kolkhozes*)<sup>[39]</sup> sustained by state subsidies. Overall state control and regulation would be introduced into all aspects of the economic, social and political lives of the Indigenous Peoples.<sup>[40]</sup> For both the minority regions and the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples, these changes had dramatic ramifications for community interaction with nature and society.

Regional and minority politics also had consequences for state security, economy and diplomacy. The Soviet government was thus concerned with preventing ethno-territorial units from developing as centres for nationalism. To secure its position, the Soviet government therefore subjected some minority populations to deportation—notably peoples of the North Caucasus and the Volga Germans—and forced others to assimilate to the prevailing Russo-Soviet culture. This forced relocation of some ethnic groups resulted in the destruction of their social, cultural and economic structures.<sup>[41, 42]</sup>  The migration of Russian-speaking Slavs to the previously non-Russified regions reinforced the process of acculturation, and from the 1930s onwards, teaching of Russian language became compulsory and many native languages disappeared from schools.<sup>[43]</sup> To encourage this process, indigenous children were sent to boarding schools where their Moscow-trained teachers refocused their lives, languages, and identities away from their indigenous heritages.

By the end of the 1930s, the concept of nationality had largely supplanted that of ethnicity. Official Soviet narratives celebrated ethnic difference through colourful folkloric displays that emphasized the existing unity and friendship of the peoples of the USSR but—at the same time—concealed any forms of cultural difference that would threaten or cast doubt upon this narrative.

The most significant impact on indigenous lives and lifestyles occurred during the 1960s when the government pursued a policy of resettling people from small villages to larger urban areas. This forced displacement destroyed centuries-in-the-making and ecologically balanced environmental management systems created by Indigenous Peoples. The resulting ethnic integration and mass separation of children from their parents that occurred due to their education in boarding schools, coupled with the reduction of accessible hunting, fishing and herding areas and manifest loss of opportunities to engage in traditional activities led to a spiritual and economic crisis among Indigenous Peoples. From the 1970s, hidden unemployment, alcoholism, broken families and the undermining of traditional culture all continued to increase.  These phenomena combined to trigger first a decrease in rates of population growth and later to declining aboriginal populations—paralleling similar trends in countries from the USA to Australia. Even the ILO in its Convention No. 107 encouraged integration predicated on the disappearance of indigenous and tribal societies with modernization.<sup>[44]</sup> Partially in response to these changes, ethno-nationalist sentiments continued on the rise among many of the minority constituents of the RSFSR from the 1960s onward. New classes of indigenous political and cultural elites began to emerge. In the 1980s, the combination of growing ethno-nationalist sentiments, the emergence of a reformist General Secretary (Mikhail Gorbachev), and disparities across the territorial administrative constituents of the Soviet Union provided the conditions for minority issues to re-assume central significance.<sup>[45]</sup>

While the USSR was conceived as a union of distinct nations,<sup>[46]</sup> not all nationalities were always conceptualized as equally advanced. The 19th century Marxist conceptualization of nationality, retained by many Communist Party theoreticians, encompassed a range of ethnic formations that were defined on a continuum of backward to advanced, with Russians as the most advanced group. Pastoral groups like the Sakha occupied a sort of middle ground—perceived as less advanced than the national populations of the Ukraine, Belarus, and Uzbekistan, but still less backward than the small indigenous populations of the North, Siberia and the Far East. These varied classifications—linked as they were to administrative hierarchies of territorial governance—have partially conditioned how the concept of Indigenous Peoples is understood in the post-Soviet period.<sup>[47, 48]</sup>


#### Footnotes:

* <small>[7]: Diatchkova 2001. </small>
* <small>[8]: United Nations Human Rights Council. 2010. ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people,’ James Anaya. Addendum — ‘Situation of Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation’ [A/HRC/15/37/Add.5] New York: Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights. Available online at: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IPeoples/SRIndigenousPeoples/Pages/CountryReports.aspx </small>
* <small>[9]: By the time of colonization, the Indigenous Peoples of the North had already developed subsistence patterns in accordance with their natural environment, as well as regulations concerning social relations, mutual aid, public support of the disabled, orphans and widows, regulations of collective use of certain territories (hunting grounds, fishing sites, reindeer pastures), property relations and inheritance. Most indigenous nations led a nomadic life and were organized in autonomous clans or territorial communities based on common law. Under these circumstances the Tsarist policy towards the indigenous population rested on indirect control through the traditional institutions of the community. (Diatchkova 2001, citing: Высочайше утвержденный 22 июля 1822 года Устав Об управлении инородцев [‘Regulations of Indigenous population of 1822’], 1998 *Национальная политика в императорской России* [*National Politics in the Tsarist Russia*], Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology, ed. VII. Semenov, Moscow, Staryi Sad: 141-176.) </small>
* <small>[10]:The peoples of the Caucasus region—incorporated into the Russian state in the 19th century, along with a variety of Central Asian populations—had similarly developed lifeways and institutions of governance. </small>
* <small>[11]: Diatchkova 2001. </small>
* <small>[12]: Diatchkova 2001. </small>
* <small>[13]: Высочайше утвержденный 22 июля 1822 года Устав Об управлении инородцев (‘Regulations of Indigenous Population of 1822’), 1998 *Национальная Политика в императорской России* (*National Politics in the Tsarist Russia*), ed. Yu I. Semenov, Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Ethnology and Anthopology, Moscow, Staryi Sad: 7. </small>
* <small>[14]: Diatchkova, 2001. </small>
* <small>[15]: Russification was actually known as early as the 16th century with the Khanate of Kazan (medieval Tatar state which occupied the territory of former Volga Bulgaria; conquered by Ivan IV in 1552) and other Tatar areas, but this passage speaks of a more deliberate and systemic policy. </small>
* <small>[16]: Minority Rights Group International. 2011. ‘World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples - Russian Federation: Overview.’ [Updated August 2011]. UNHCR Refworld. Available at:
http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/country,,,COUNTRYPROF,RUS,,4954ce18c,0.html [accessed 01 June 2012]. </span>
* <small>[17]: Definition of a nation in J. Stalin, Marxism and the National Question, March–May 1913; Russian original: J. Stalin, Collected Works in 16 Volumes, volume 2. </small>
* <small>[18]: Declaration of Rights of the Peoples of Russia, 15 November 1917, Big Soviet Encyclopedia, on-line edition. Retrieved 15 November 2008. </small>
* <small>[19]: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). 2004. Persistent Toxic Substances, Food Security and Indigenous Peoples of the Russian North. [Chapter 2 of the Final Report]. Oslo: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme Website. Available online at:
http://amap.no/documents/index.cfm?dirsub=%2FPersistent%20Toxic%20Substances%2C%20Food%20Security%20and%20Indigenous%20Peoples%20of%20the%20Russian%20North&sort=datelastmodified&CFID=8305&CFTOKEN=113E1F0F-1653-1298-0AFC124363948720 </small>
* <small>[20]: Hirsch, Francine. 2005. Empire of nations. Ithaca: Cornell University Press </small>
* <small>[21]: Hicks, Susan M. 2011. ‘Between Indigeneity and Nationality: The Politics of Culture and Nature in Russia’s Diamond Province.’ Theses submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Vancouver: Faculty of Graduate Studies, University of British Columbia. Available online at: https://circle.ubc.ca/handle/2429/37777 </small>
* <small>[22]: The exact number of ASSR and AO varied over the years as new entities were created while old entities switched from one form to another, transformed into Union-level republics (for example, Kazakh and Kyrgyz SSR created in 1936, Moldovan SSR created in 1940), or were absorbed into larger territories (for example, Crimean ASSR absorbed into the RSFSR in 1945 and Volga German ASSR absorbed into RSFSR in 1941). </span>
* <small>[23]: Such ‘autonomy’ did not in fact imply any form of self-administration. </small>
* <small>[24]: Here we do not enter into temporary Stalinist policies, which tried to eliminate the concept of “национальности” [“nationalities”] as a whole, to wipe out all ethnic differences. </small>
* <small>[25]: Dallmann, Winfried and Helle Goldman. No date. ‘Indigenous – native – aboriginal: Confusion and translation problems.’ ANSIPRA website: http://ansipra.npolar.no/english/items/Confusion.html </small>
* <small>[26]: List of nationalities in the 1926 USSR census on demoscrope.ru  </small>
* <small>[27]: Gerhard Simon. 1991. Nationalism and Policy toward the Nationalities in the Soviet Union: From Totalitarian Dictatorship to Post-Stalinist Society. Westview Press, Boulder, CO. </small>
* <small>[28]: Referenced in Klokov KB, Hrushchev SA. No date. ‘Demographic Reproduction Dynamics of Populations Reproduction of Native Small Peoples of the North of Russia and its Regional Features.’ Available online at: http://www.shu.ru/old/pages/magazin/n20/klokov.pdf
Aslo referenced in Golovnev A. 2012. ‘Ethnicity: Stability and Variability (The Experience of the North).’ Available online at:  http://ethnobs.ru/library/237/_aview_b19541 </small>
* <small>[29]: России: саамы, ненцы, ханты, манси, энцы, долганы, нганасаны, селькупы, кеты, эвенки, юкагиры, эвены, чукчи, коряки, эскимосы, алеуты, ительмены, тофалары, ульчи, нанайцы, нивхи, удэгейцы, негидальцы, ороки, орочи, чуванцы. </small>
* <small>[30]: AMAP, 2004. </small>
* <small>[31]: Bogoraz-Tan V.G., 1923. On study and preservation of the borderland peoples. The report presented at the extended Narkomnats Board, 24 March 1923. ‘Zhizn' natsionalnostej (Life of nationalities)’, Book III-IV, 168-180 (in Russian). </small>
* <small>[32]: Consisting of Marxists and non-Marxists, the Committee of the North was a conglomeration of experts on Indigenous Peoples. The basic principle of this Committee was non-interference with the development of traditional societies and the creation of new bodies of autonomous administration. Until 1934, it ‘was responsible for the economic development, conservation and management of the wildlife, establishment of political and legal institutions, trade, medical care, and education in Native regions’ (Bartels, 1986:6-7; Diatchkova, 2001). </span>
* <small>[33]: Diatchkova, 2001. </small>
* <small>[34]: http://www2.brandonu.ca/library/cjns/14.2/hele.pdf </small>
* <small>[35]: http://www2.brandonu.ca/library/cjns/14.2/hele.pdf </small>
* <small>[36]: A. 1. Krushanov, 1987. ‘Isotoriia i kul'tura Chukchei (The history and culture of the Chulcchi).’ Leningrad: Nauka; D. L. Schindler, 1991. ‘Theory, Policy and the Narody Severa,’ Anthropological Quarterly 64(2): 68-79; M. A. Sergeev, 1955. ‘Nelcapitalisticheskii put' rarvitiia malykh narodov Severa,’ Trudy Instituta Etnografi AN SSSR, New Series, XXVII, Moscow-Leningrad; lu Slezkine, 1992. ‘From Savages to Citizens: The Cultural Revolution in the Soviet Far North, 1928-1938,’ Slavic Review 51(1): 52-76; V. A. Uvachan, 1977. ‘Perekhod malykh narodov Severa at rodovogo stroia K razvitomu sotsializmu,’ Letopis' Severa 1 8: 21-36; 1. S. Vdovin, 1973. ‘Legislative, economic, social and cultural policies of the USSR to encourage the development of the Chukchi and the Eskimo,’ The MuskOx, l3:41-48. </small>
* <small>[37]: This reorganization was part of an attempt to provide an infrastructure of locally produced goods (eggs, milk, meat, vegetables, etc.) and services to support the growth of industry in the Far North. </small>
* <small>[38]: V. Komarov, October 27, 1988. ‘U narodoswi Severa (Among the peoples of the North),’ Sel'skma Zhizn'. </small>
* <small>[39]: Later on, kolkhozes in the northern areas were replaced by Soviet farms (совхоз; sovkhozes) with nearly all the property of the indigenous population nationalized (AMAP, 2004). </small>
* <small>[40]: Diatchkova, 2001. </small>
* <small>[41]: Secretariat of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations. 1997. ‘Review of Developments Pertaining to the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of Indigenous People: Environment, Land And Sustainable Development. Addendum: Information received from indigenous peoples and non-governmental organizations.’ Available online at: http://www.suri.ee/doc/saamide.html </span>
* <small>[42]: It should be noted, however, that the major deportations which took place during World War II did not affect the Indigenous Peoples (i.e., those referred to as “Small-numbered Peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East”) and such mass deportations were never a routine element of Soviet ethnic politics. </small>
* <small>[43]: Minority Rights Group International, 2011. </small>
* <small>[44]: Key difference between ILO 107 and 169 are summarized by ILO in this short article entlted  ‘Convention 107’, Available at: http://www.ilo.org/indigenous/Conventions/no107/lang--en/index.htm </small>
* <small>[45]: Minority Rights Group International, 2011a </small>
* <small>[46]: Hicks, 2011. </small>
* <small>[47]: Köhler, Thomas, and Kathrin Wessendorf, eds, 2002. Towards a New Millenium: Ten Years of the Indigenous Movement in Russia. Copenhagen: IWGIA. </small>
* <small>[48]: Hicks, 2011. </small>


#### 4.2. Ethnicity and Indigeneity in the Formation of the Russian Federation

The abrupt transition to a market economy during Perestroika and the collapse of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991 brought questions of ethnicity and nationality back into the center of Russian politics. Both Russians and minority populations faced two principal and interrelated challenges.  The first was how to formulate a Russian national identity that incorporated the diversity of peoples and cultures of the new Russian Federation (RF). In the RSFSR of the late 1980s,<sup>[49]</sup> the Russian democratic movement was formed around a civic notion of the state.  Yet after independence, this movement disintegrated in the face of ethno-nationalist sentiments. The position of ethnic Russians, Russian culture and history, and the Russian language in the new Russian state thus needed to be determined. Second, due to the link between territory and political/economic rights that developed in the late 1980s,  the administrative arrangements of the new Russian Federation became extremely important. The contradiction between the Kremlin’s desire to maintain dominance over the regions and the wish of many of the minorities for autonomy, or even independence, fostered a power struggle between federal and regional authorities.<sup>[50]</sup> Political contestation over issues of ethno-nationalism escalated into open conflict between the Russian state and some of its national minority constituents—particularly in the North Caucasus.

Russia’s small-numbered minority and indigenous populations were rendered still more vulnerable within the newly re-constituted state. Many communities experienced something of an organizational void, lacking the former structure imposed by the Soviet government and unable to define a role for themselves in the newly-emerging systems of state governance. Furthermore, the collapse and disintegration of state-owned fur farms and fishery and reindeer breeding enterprises eliminated the wage-earning opportunities that had been available to indigenous communities. As a result, the post-Soviet era saw many minority and indigenous communities surviving in virtually non-cash environments with a significantly increased dependency on natural resources for their subsistence.<sup>[51]</sup> Unemployment, poverty and alcoholism soared, and some communities were brought to the brink of extinction.<sup>[52]</sup>

The political struggles of the early 1990s and the increasing prominence of ethno-regionalism sparked a general revival of the linguistic, cultural and ethnic practices of minority populations in the Russian Federation. Russia’s minority indigenous populations (especially the twenty-six so-called Indigenous Peoples” [туземных народностей; *tuzemnykh narodnostey*] of the 1926 'The Central Executive Committee Decree’) also grew more active in their own defence, establishing representative organizations advocating actively for protection and extension of their rights and freedoms. The First Congress of the Northern Minorities took place in March 1990, calling for a return of historic lands and the creation of traditional tribal councils.<sup>[53]</sup>

When the Constitution of the Russian Federation (Конституция Российской Федерации; *Konstitutsiya Rossiyskoy Federatsii*) was adopted by national referendum in 1993, it took into account the need to establish a legal distinction between ethnic (that is, “national”) minorities (национальные меньшинства; *natsional'nyye men'shinstva*) and “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples” (коренные малочисленные народы; *korennyye malochislennyye narody*).<sup>[54]</sup> Both ethnic minorities and small-numbered Indigenous Peoples have their constitutionally safeguarded rights to their own language, culture, education, and participation in decision-making, yet the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples are distinguished by statutory definition as small-numbered peoples living on ancestral lands with a lifestyle associated with the conduct of traditional economic activities.


#### Footnotes:

* <small>[49]: In the 1980s, the RSFSR was organized into 88 administrative components (subjects) of higher than city and district level. These subjects were divided into two categories. First, ethno-territorial units: 16 Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics (ASSRs) – based around sizeable non-Russian ethnic groups and considered the embodiment of the national statehood of their titular populations; 5 autonomous oblasts (regions) (AOs) – smaller ethnic-based units; 10 autonomous okrugs (districts) (AOks) – the lowest level ethnic units, situated within an oblast or krai (province). Second, the remaining areas of the RSFSR, comprising most of its constituent members and accounting for about 70 per cent of its territory and more than 80 per cent of the population, was divided into territorial formations: 6 krais (mostly large and lightly populated areas), and 49 oblasts – largely ethnically homogeneous, Russian-populated districts. In addition, Moscow and Leningrad (now St Petersburg) were given a status broadly equivalent to that of an oblast. </small>
* <small>[50]: Minority Rights Group International, 2011. ‘World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples - Russian Federation: Overview.’ [Updated August 2011]. UNHCR Refworld. Available at:
http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/country,,,COUNTRYPROF,RUS,,4954ce18c,0.html [accessed 01 June 2012]. </small>
* <small>[51]: RAIPON, IWGA, 2011. ‘Parallel Information Concerning the Situation of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of Indigenous and Small-Numbered Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation.’ Paper submitted at the occasion of the 46th Session of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2-20 May 2011. IWGA and RAIPON: Copenhagen & Moscow. Available online at:
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cescr/docs/ngos/IWGIA_RAIPON_RussianFederation_CESCR46.pdf </small>
* <small>[52]: United Nations Human Rights Council, 2010. ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people, James Anaya. Addendum - Situation of Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation’ [A/HRC/15/37/Add.5] New York: Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights. Available online at:
 http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IPeoples/SRIndigenousPeoples/Pages/CountryReports.aspx </small>
* <small>[53]: Minority Rights Group International, 2011. </small>
* <small>[54]: Ethnic minorities (paragraph “c”, Article 71 and paragraph “b”, Article 72) and “small-numbered peoples” (Article 69). Ethnic minorities policies are based on the Federal Law of June 17, 1996, ‘On the national-cultural autonomy’ (although both this law and Russian legislation in general does not contain a legal definition of ethnic minorities) and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (ratified by the Federal Law of June 18, 1998 ). Status as “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East of the Russian Federation” is determined by Federal Law of 30 April 1999 ‘On Guarantees of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation,’ with a specified list approved by governmental decree № 255 on March 24, 2000. </small>


### 5.	The Emergence of a Modern Russian Concept of Indigeneity

As detailed above, the concept of indigeneity has undergone a dramatic shift throughout the recent development of the Russian state.  Prior to the Revolution of 1917 the peoples today classified as indigenous were subsumed under a broader category such as the term "stray persons of different origin" (бродячие инородцы; *brodyachiye inorodtsy*) found in 1822 in the ‘Charter for the Management of Persons of Different Ethnicity.’

During the Soviet period the terms "native peoples and tribes of the Northern regions” (туземные народности и племена Северных окраин; *tuzemnyye narodnosti i plemena Severnykh okrain*, 1920), "small peoples of the North" (малые народности Севера; *malyye narodnosti Severa*, 1930s-1940s), and "peoples of the North " (народности Севера; *narodnosti Severa*, 1940s–1980s), were used sequentially to define legal categories of peoples targeted for special state policy protections—that is, those minority nationalities that were clearly distinct from the larger ethnic populations surrounding them (and also considered endangered populations).  Also, as detailed above, this trend in the Russian concept of “indigeneity” being established as a legal construct was carried over to the post-Soviet (1993) *Constitution of the Russian Federation*, which included specific provisions for “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples” (коренные малочисленные народы; *korennyye malochislennyye narody*). This eventually evolved to encompass several Indigenous Peoples living in the Caucasus (Abaza in the Karachay-Cherkessia Republic of Dagestan, Shapsugs in Krasnodar), Volga (Bessermyane in Udmurtia Republic), in the steppe zone (Nagaybaki in Chelyabinsk Region), and the small peoples of north-west Russia (Veps in Karelia Republic, Leningrad, Vologda Region), Izhorians (in Leningrad), Vod (in Leningrad), Setu (in Pskov Region) engaged in farming and animal husbandry.

This legal category was codified by the Government of the Russian Federation under the ‘Unified Register of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation’ (Единый перечень коренных, малочисленных народов Российской Федерации; *Yedinyy perechen' korennykh, malochislennykh narodov Rossiyskoy Federatsii*<sup>[55]</sup>) March 24, 2000. This Unified Register enumerated a list of Russian’s culturally distinctive<sup>[56]</sup> minority ethnic groups<sup>[57]</sup>—a list that now comprises 47 numerically small minority peoples<sup>[58]</sup>, of which 40 inhabit territories belonging to Siberia, the Russian North or the Russian Far East<sup>[59]</sup>—the identification of which is based on the following criteria:<sup>[60]</sup>

*	Living in the historical territories of their ancestors
*	Preserving their traditional way of life, occupations, and folk art [handicrafts]
*	Self-recognizing themselves as a separate ethnicity
*	Numbering at most 50,000 people within Russia<sup>[61, 62]</sup>

Those peoples so recognized as “коренных малочисленных народов Российкой Федераци (*korennykh malochislennykh narodov Rossiykoy Federatsii*)” (small-numbered native [indigenous] peoples of the Russian Federation; KMNRF) by 2010 comprised ca. 316,000 individuals (with ca. 258,000 among the KMNSSDV (small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East) residing within 28 constituent political administrative units (*also* “federal subjects”) of the Russian Federation.<sup>[63]</sup> The size of these groups varies from fewer than 300 (4 Kereks, 14 Aliutortsy, 227 Entsy, 274 Taz, and 295 Orok) to more than 40,000 (41,000 Nenets)<sup>[64]</sup> and the Evenks with 35,000 members in Russia and 30,000 more in Northern China.<sup>[65, 66]</sup> These figures also do not include the over two million strong Dagestan peoples who, according to a government decree in 2000, were supposed to be included in the overall Register of small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of Russia after Dagestan carried out its own regional listing.<sup>[67]</sup> Additionally, the special class of “коренные малочисленные народы Севера, Сибири и Дальнего Востока Российского Федерации” (“small-numbered native peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation”; *korennyye malochislennyye narody Severa, Sibiri i Dal'nego Vostoka Rossiyskogo Federatsii* the KMNSSDV)<sup>[68]</sup> has come into widespread use in legal documents and scientific literature.


## Part III.    Legal Contexts

Experience, independent evaluation (see ‘Vietnam Country Assistance Evaluation,’ OED Report No. 23288, November 21, 2001), and operational research tell us that the impact of development assistance can be increased if development agencies support efforts to strengthen the institutions and systems that countries already have in place.  Starting in 2005, the World Bank began a gradual process of exploring how to utilize borrower-country environmental and social safeguard systems (that is, its national, subnational, or sectoral implementing institutions and applicable laws, regulations, rules and procedures) in Bank-supported operations. OP 4.10 also allows that, ‘In furtherance of the objectives of this policy, the Bank may, at a member country’s request, support the country in its development planning and poverty reduction strategies by providing financial assistance for a variety of initiatives’ (paragraph 22; see also section 12 below for specific recommendations along these lines).

To facilitate progress toward application and extension of the World Bank’s OP 4.10 that is in line with the country safeguard systems of the Russian Federation, this chapter (Part III) provides a brief overview of laws and regulations applicable to the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation.  It should be noted that this chapter aims only to introduce the core legal frameworks of the Russian Federation; more detailed discussions will follow in Part IV, which juxtaposes Russian law against the aims of World Bank OP 4.10.


### 6.	An Overview of Legal Protections for Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation

#### 6.1. The Federal Legal System and its Articulations with International Law

Today, the Russian Federation consists of eighty-three constituent units  (субъект Российской Федерации; *subyekt Rossiyskoy Federatsii*). Any matter that is not defined by the Constitution as an issue of federal or joint concern is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the constituent component of the federation. State power is exercised on the basis of its separation by the President of the Russian Federation, the bicameral Federal Assembly (that is, the legislature, comprising the Federation Council and the State Duma), the Government of the Russian Federation (that is, the Prime Minister, a first Deputy Prime Minister, six Deputy Prime Ministers and 21 other Ministers), and the judiciary (that is, the Constitutional Court with the right of judicial review, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court of Arbitration, regionally-based federal courts of general jurisdiction, regionally-based courts of arbitration assigned to the resolution of economic disputes; also, the institution of Justices of the Peace was introduced for the resolution of small claims at the local level).

The Constitution of the Russian Federation establishes the modern Russian state as a democratic and federal state with a republican form of government based on the rule of law and deriving its legitimate right to rule from the people of Russia. The Constitution proclaims a broad array of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights to be guaranteed by the state. These rights generally conform to international standards as established by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, and the International Covenant on Human Rights of 1966, as well as to other international legal conventions to which the Russian Federation is a signatory. Universally acknowledged principles and standards of international law and international treaties of the Russian Federation are a part of Russia’s legal system. Should an international treaty of the Russian Federation establish rules other than those established by a domestic law, the rules of the international treaty will prevail.

In addition to general commitments to human rights and freedoms (dealt with especially in Articles 2, and 17–64), the Constitution of the Russian Federation contains at least five articles that have direct consequences for Indigenous Peoples:

<span>1)	Article 9 </span><br />

1.	Land and other natural resources shall be utilized and protected in the Russian Federation as the basis of the life and activity of the peoples living on the territories concerned.
2.	Land and other natural resources may be subject to private, State, municipal and other forms of ownership.

<span>2)	Article 15 </span><br />

1.	The Constitution of the Russian Federation shall have supreme legal force, direct effect and shall be applicable on the entire territory of the Russian Federation. Laws and other legal acts, which are adopted in the Russian Federation, must not contradict the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
2.	State government bodies, local self-government bodies, officials, citizens and their associations shall be obliged to observe the Constitution of the Russian Federation and laws.
3.	Laws must be officially published. Unpublished laws shall not have force. Any normative legal acts concerning human and civil rights, freedoms and obligations shall not have force unless they have been officially published for the information of the general public.
4.	Universally recognized principles and norms of international law as well as international agreements of the Russian Federation should be an integral part of its legal system. If an international agreement of the Russian Federation establishes rules, which differ from those stipulated by law, then the rules of the international agreement shall be applied.

<span>3)	Article 36 </span><br />

1.	Citizens and their associations shall have the right to possess land as private property.
2.	Possession, utilization and disposal of land and other natural resources shall be exercised by the owners freely, provided that this is not detrimental to the environment and does not violate the rights and lawful interests of other people.
3.	The conditions and procedure for the use of land shall be determined by federal law.

<span>4)	Article 69 </span><br />

The Russian Federation shall guarantee the rights of indigenous small peoples in accordance with the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and international treaties of the Russian Federation.

<span>5)	Article 72, part 1, item ‘l’ </span><br />

The following shall be within the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and constituent entities of the Russian Federation: … (l) protection of traditional habitat and the traditional way of life of small ethnic communities.

The constitutional commitments to international law established in Articles 15 and 69 are especially important for Indigenous Peoples as it is within international law that many of the rights and freedoms fundamental to Indigenous Peoples are enshrined. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for instance, establishes that all human beings are “equal in dignity and rights” (Article 1) and entitled to the rights defined in the Declaration, “without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status” (Article 2).

Despite the Constitution’s emphasis on equality, democracy, and respect for international law, many Indigenous Peoples organizations and their advocates maintain that this respect for all enshrined in the Constitution gives little space to Indigenous Peoples as communities, as opposed to individual indigenous people. Indigenous Peoples and their representative organizations, instead often cite international law to substantiate their claims as groups to specific rights and freedoms vis-à-vis conflicting laws and activities of the states. This sets up a critical tension in the legal and regulatory relationship between the state and indigenous communities.

##### 6.1.1: Russian Consitutional Commitments to International Law: “Core” Human Rights Instruments

The Russian Federation is a party to many—though not all—of the international treaties and conventions underpinning the rights-based claims of Indigenous Peoples. Of those Conventions to which it is a party, perhaps the three most prominently cited  by Indigenous Peoples Organizations of the Russian Federation when making rights-based claims are:

<span>1)	International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination</span><br />

The UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)   commits its signatories to the elimination of racial discrimination and the promotion of understanding among all races (Article 2). Racial discrimination is defined as “any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life” (Article 1). Specific articles within the convention require states to condemn apartheid, promote tolerance, prohibit incitement of racially motivated violence, and prevent discrimination. Controversially, the Convention also requires its parties to outlaw hate speech and criminalize membership in racist organizations (Article 4).

The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) includes an individual complaints mechanism, effectively making it enforceable against its parties. This has led to the development of a limited jurisprudence on the interpretation and implementation of the Convention.

The convention was adopted and opened for signature by the United Nations General Assembly on December 21, 1965, and entered into force on January 4, 1969. As of June 2012, it had 86 signatories and 175 parties.  The Convention is monitored by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD).

<span>2)	International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights</span><br />

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)   commits its parties to respect the civil and political rights of individuals, including the right to life, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, electoral rights and rights to due process and a fair trial. There are also provisions for collective rights. “In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use their own language” (Article 27). The ICCPR is part of the International Bill of Human Rights, along with the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 16, 1966, and entered into force on March 23, 1976. As of June 2012, the Covenant had 74 signatories and 167 parties.  The ICCPR is monitored by the Human Rights Committee (a separate body to the Human Rights Council), which reviews regular reports of States’ parties on how the rights are being implemented. States must report initially one year after acceding to the Covenant and then whenever the Committee requests (usually every four years).

<span>3)	International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights</span><br />

The ICESCR  commits its parties to work toward the granting of economic, social, and cultural rights to individuals, including labor rights and the right to health, the right to education, and the right to an adequate standard of living. It also has provisions for collective rights. The ICESCR is part of the International Bill of Human Rights, along with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), including the latter's first and second Optional Protocols.

The Covenant was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 16, 1966, and entered into force on January 3, 1976. As of July 2011, the Covenant had 70 signatories and 160 parties.   A further six countries had signed, but not yet ratified the Covenant. The Covenant is monitored by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

##### 6.1.2: Russian Consitutional Commitments to International Law: Additional Human Rights Instruments

The Russian Federation is also a party to the Council of Europe, having joined in February 1996. It ratified the Council Resolution of 30 November 2008 on Indigenous Peoples within the Framework of the Development Cooperation of the Community and Members States [13461/98], which affirmed Indigenous Peoples’ rights, including self-development, and called for integrating Indigenous Peoples concerns into the Union’s existing procedures and guidelines for development cooperation.

The Russian Federation has not ratified International Labour Organization Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (1989), and abstained from voting on the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

#### 6.2. The Federal Legal System and its Provisions for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples

Federal laws constitute the second category of legal sources. They regulate issues falling under the executive authority of the Russian Federation and its components. The Constitution protects the priority and direct effect of federal laws throughout the territory of Russia. In case of a conflict between federal law and another act issued in Russia, the federal law will prevail. Meanwhile, the Constitution guarantees the priority of the act of a constituent component if such act regulates issues outside the Russian Federation’s scope of authority.

The core framework for Russia’s federal protections of the rights of Indigenous Peoples is comprised primarily of three federal laws:

<span>1)	On Guarantees of the Rights of Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation</span><br />

Passed in 1999, On Guarantees of the Rights of Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation (‘On Guarantees’) recognizes the rights of Russia’s small-numbered Indigenous Peoples to protect and utilize their natural habitats, traditional ways of life and economic activities (particularly fishing and hunting). It affirms that Indigenous Peoples may set up territorial self-government bodies in places of compact settlement, form communities and other organizations, reform their educational institutions according to their traditional way of life, receive compensation for damage to their traditional environment due to industrial activities, and have courts consider their customary laws provided these are not contradicted by federal or regional legislation. ‘On Guarantees’ also provides that federal executive bodies shall see to it that federal and regional programs protect customary indigenous rights regarding land tenure, community management of natural resources, and land surveys and monitoring.

Importantly, ‘On Guarantees’ establishes the legal definition of “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples”  as, “ethnic communities with fewer than 50,000 persons who inhabit their ancestral homelands, maintaining traditional ways of life, community organization and economic activities and folk art [handicrafts] and who perceive themselves as belonging to separate ethnic communities” (Article 1). The legal category of “small-numbered Indigenous Peoples’ is a classification defined under a common national register.

<span>2)	On General Principles of Organization of the Obshchina of Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation</span><br />

Adopted in 2000, On General Principles of Organization of Obshchina of Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation (‘On Obshchina’) establishes general principles for the formation of obshchina, or clan community, of numerically small Indigenous Peoples of the North, of the Siberia and of the Far East of the Russian Federation “for the goals of defending their age-old surroundings, and the maintenance and development of traditional ways of life, economy, trades and culture.” Obshchinas may consist of a single family, a few families, or a whole village, and are entitled to receive use rights for allotments of land parcels, and quotas for fishing and hunting, accommodating their traditional practices.

<span>3)	On Territories of Traditional Nature Use of the Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation</span><br />

Adopted in 2001, On Territories of Traditional Nature Use of the Numerically-small Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation (‘On Territories’) provides that the land an indigenous community utilizes for traditional economic activities may be granted a special legal designation of “territory of traditional nature use,” and be assigned to that community to use free-of-charge for a certain renewable period of time. Once created, the Indigenous Peoples living in these territories are guaranteed the right to continue to occupy the land and use its renewable resources for traditional activities, the right to participate in decision-making when industrial development in the territory is considered, and the right to receive compensation when industrial development that interferes with their access to land or damages the environment occurs there. The law ‘On Territories’ also provides that where designated traditional nature use territories are established, oil and other industrial development may occur only after consultation and agreement with the indigenous communities living there.

Further extending these three framework laws, is the Federal Decree On the Concept of Sustainable Development of the Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation  (‘Concept Paper’) issued by the Government of the Russian Federation in February 2009. The ‘Concept Paper’ elaborates federal policy for the period of 2009 to 2025 for improving the socio-economic conditions of Indigenous Peoples and for protecting their traditional environments, way of life and cultural values.  It poses seven key objectives for state support to indigenous development  and specifies time frames and benchmarks for realizing these objectives. The first stage, from 2009 to 2011, aimed to improve and harmonize legislation; to provide a better delineation of the jurisdiction of federal, regional and local authorities; and to solidify priority access for Indigenous Peoples to fishing and hunting grounds and free-of-charge access to land areas for traditional use. The first implementation stage also envisioned the creation of new nomadic schools, trading posts, and other infrastructure in areas of traditional dwelling; increased availability of medical services, and cultural and communications services; increased federal subsidies given to regional budgets to support reindeer husbandry and other types of stock breeding; as well as the formation of a federal statistics-gathering system to monitor the condition of Indigenous Peoples, and carrying out analyses of demographic factors and indicators of the living standards of Indigenous Peoples after the 2010 census.

Additionally—as will be further detailed in the discussions that follow—several other pieces of legislation have significance for the rights and protections of Indigenous Peoples, including:

*	Land Code of the Russian Federation [October 25, 2001, N 136-ФЗ]
*	Federal law On Fisheries and the Conservation of Aquatic Biological Resources [December 20, 2004, № 166-ФЗ]
*	Water Code of the Russian Federation [June 3, 2006, N 74-ФЗ]
*	Forestry Code of the Russian Federation [December 4, 2006, № 200-ФЗ]
*	Federal law On the Conservation of Hunting Grounds and Amendments to Specific Regulations of the Russian Federation [July 24, 2009, № 209-ФЗ]


------

An Indigenous View

The laws and regulations introduced above have important ramifications for Indigenous Peoples’ access to the natural resources upon which they depend. However, many Indigenous Peoples leaders and observers of indigenous affairs aver that there is a general lack of implementation of the protections that are afforded by the legal framework and that this constitutes a quite serious problem. In a 2007 interview,  given by Pavel Sulyandziga, First Vice-President of RAIPON and member of the Public Chamber, in response to the question, “What has been the effect on the life of the Small Peoples [KMNSSDV] of the Forest, Land and Water Codes?” we can see clearly the indigenous experience of the gap between the formal legal framework and implementation.

The Land Code has done us the greatest harm. The term “permanent free use” has been eliminated from Russian vocabulary, with only “lease” and “property” remaining. Recently an amendment was made declaring that permanent ownership of land is possible, but it refers to the Russian Orthodox Church alone. The small indigenous peoples have been brushed aside, so to say. Nobody is going to give reindeer-breeders their millions of hectares of pasture, with huge mineral resources on them. The only alternative left is lease, which is very expensive. Thank God, the regional officials have not charged the indigenous peoples anything as yet – probably due to inertia: they have never done so before. But as things stand, it turns out that the indigenous peoples are using the land illegally. So we are trespassers on our own lands. Incidentally, there have already been two instances—in the Primorsky Territory and in the Magadan Region—of the Federal Forest Service attempting to extract rent for the use of hunting grounds.

Today there is a huge problem that regional authorities would prefer to keep silent on and the Federal Government would rather ignore—it is the buying up of lands in the North, Siberia and the Russian Far East. This process became noticeable four years ago, when the situation in Russia became completely stabilized and business people must have realized that there still were tidbits not seized by anybody. Whereas big property (petroleum, natural gas and gold) had been divided long before, smaller industries (forest, fishing, hunting and tourism) were farmed out to the local authorities. As a result, there followed an ousting of indigenous peoples from their areas of habitation, which still continues. At the same time, new proprietors understand that driving away the aborigines is impossible because a row may ensue. The land grab is going on quietly.

The pattern is about the same almost everywhere. The administration of the region invites applications for the lease of hunting or fishing grounds. As the small indigenous community lives in the taiga forest in remote villages, its people know nothing about the contest. But even if they chance to find out and do try to apply, the tender committee will brush them off under any pretext—in most cases by finding errors in the drawing up of the document. Although legally it is the indigenous population that has priority rights to apply for the lease of fishing or hunting grounds, this is only what the law proclaims. In reality, for example in the Amur Region none of the indigenous communities managed to win any of the hunting ground leases on the Evenk-populated territory last year; all the leases were won by a company whose owner is said to be close to the regional administration.

Well, what happened next was that the company came to see the indigenous people and said to them, “Comrade aborigines! The land is mine; go on hunting, but do it for me now. Bring the fur and other things to my office and submit them at a fixed rate. If you refuse to do so, I’ll evict you.” What could they do? Nothing. Those that disagree, if any, are quickly branded as poachers—in full conformity with the law now, for they have hunted without permission on grounds that do not belong to them.

The saddest thing is that the business-persons act under the umbrella of the regional authorities and hence totally unabashedly. If the situation is not reversed, this will undermine the foundations of the indigenous peoples’ life and will destroy them.



## Part IV.    Operationalizing World Bank Policy in the Russian Federation—A Problématique

The intention of this section of the report (Part IV) is to: i) assist Bank teams in addressing some of the challenges in applying OP 4.10 in the Russian Federation, and ii) establish a point of departure for the recommendations to the World Bank for improved application of OP 4.10 in the Russian Federation. These dual goals are accomplished via a focused discussion of the extent to which the national laws and regulatory frameworks of the Russian Federation coincide with the provisions of the World Bank policy.

It should be noted, however, that this discussion is not intended to cover all provisions of the OP but will instead focus on key conceptual issues critical to policy application in the Russian Federation. These include identification of “who is indigenous,” dimensions of participation, and the “areas requiring special attention” highlighted by OP 4.10 (that is, those related to operations within territories of customary use by Indigenous Peoples, commercial development of natural and cultural resources, and physical relocation). Because of its significance as a potential entry point for World Bank cooperation with local and regional governments, the OP 4.10 list of potential initiatives in support of developmental priorities of Indigenous Peoples is also addressed.


### 7.	Issues and Concerns in the Identification of Indigenous Peoples

The World Bank’s OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples seeks to contribute to the Bank's mission of poverty reduction and sustainable development “by ensuring that the development process fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and cultures of Indigenous People.”  Yet as discussed above (Part II) the concept of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ that is formalized within the laws of the Russian Federation refers to only a small sub-set of the minority ethnic peoples residing in the territories that comprise the modern nation-state.

This section elaborates on the category of ‘Indigenous Peoples’—first under World Bank policy, then under international law. In so doing, some issues and concerns are raised about the challenges of operationalizing World Bank policy within a state political context that has a relatively more restrictive—and very well entrenched—understanding of the term. Informed by these contexts, this section concludes with some considerations for reconciling the varied Russian associations of ‘minority peoples’ and ‘indigenous peoples’ with the World Bank’s operational category of ‘Indigenous Peoples.’

#### 7.1.	The Category of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ under World Bank Policy

OP 4.10 treats ‘Indigenous Peoples’ as an operational category; the need to define who (or which group) counts as ‘Indigenous Peoples’ is necessary for Bank-financed projects for delimiting recipients of the special class of entitlements defined by the policy. Acknowledging that “[b]ecause of the varied and changing contexts in which Indigenous Peoples live and because there is no universally accepted definition of Indigenous Peoples” (paragraph 3), OP 4.10 claims not to “define the term,” but instead to define attributes that, if possessed by a sociocultural group, would characterize it as both ‘distinct’ and ‘vulnerable,’ and so would trigger the policy for operational purposes.  As OP 4.10 states (paragraph 4):

For purposes of this policy, the term ‘Indigenous Peoples’ is used in a generic sense to refer to a distinct, vulnerable, social and cultural group  possessing the following characteristics in varying degrees:

<span>(a)	self-identification as members of a distinct indigenous cultural group and recognition of this identity by others;</span><br/>
<span>(b)	collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area and to the natural resources in these habitats and territories</span><br/>
<span>(c)	customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society and culture; and</span><br/>
<span>(d)	an indigenous language, often different from the official language of the country or region.</span><br/>

A group that has lost ‘collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area’ (paragraph 4 (b)) because of forced severance remains eligible for coverage under this policy.  Ascertaining whether a particular group is considered as ‘Indigenous Peoples’ for the purpose of this policy may require a technical judgement (see paragraph 8).

OP 4.10 notes, too, that a wide range of terms may refer to peoples that would be recognized as Indigenous Peoples for purposes of policy application, including “indigenous ethnic minorities, aboriginals, hill tribes, minority nationalities, scheduled tribes, or tribal groups” (paragraph 3).

It might also be pertinent to recognize that other international financial institutions—IFC, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), among others—approach the issue of identification similarly, although some emphasize vulnerability as a quasi-criterion for designation as an ‘Indigenous People’ for the purposes of policy application.

In its formulation of its own Indigenous Peoples policy, Performance Standard 7, IFC’s triggers for Indigenous Peoples policy application are nearly word for word the same as those of OP 4.10. Most other requirements of the two policies are also broadly equivalent. The most significant difference between PS7 and OP 4.10 lies in the PS’s adoption of the requirement for free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC) from project-affected indigenous communities for projects that commercially exploit the natural or cultural resources of indigenous territories or require the involuntary resettlement of indigenous communities.

#### 7.2.	The Concept and Term ‘Indigenous Peoples’ within International Law

The United Nations system has chosen not to adopt a formal definition of Indigenous Peoples.

In 1972 the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations (WGIP) accepted the following as a preliminary definition a formulation put forward by Mr. José Martínez Cobo, Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:

Indigenous populations are composed of the existing descendants of the peoples who inhabited the present territory of a country wholly or partially at the time when persons of a different culture or ethnic origin arrived there from other parts of the world, overcame them, by conquest, settlement or other means, reduced them to a non-dominant or colonial condition; who today live more in conformity with their particular social, economic and cultural customs and traditions than with the institutions of the country of which they now form part, under a state structure which incorporates mainly national, social and cultural characteristics of other segments of the population which are predominant.

This definition was, however, recognized as too limiting, especially in that it focused principally on pre-colonial populations (versus other isolated or marginal societies.)

In 1986, Special Rapporteur Martínez Cobo revised his preliminary definition, and proposed an amended version, as follows:

Indigenous communities, peoples and nations are those which, having a historical continuity with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies that developed on their territories, consider themselves distinct from other sectors of the societies now prevailing on those territories, or parts of them. They form at present non-dominant sectors of society and are determined to preserve, develop and transmit to future generations their ancestral territories, and their ethnic identity, as the basis of their continued existence as peoples, in accordance with their own cultural patterns, social institutions and legal system.

This historical continuity may consist of the continuation, for an extended period reaching into the present of one or more of the following factors:

<span>a)	Occupation of ancestral lands, or at least of part of them; </span><br />
<span>b)	Common ancestry with the original occupants of these lands; </span><br />
<span>c)	Culture in general, or in specific manifestations (such as religion, living under a tribal system, membership of an indigenous community, dress, means of livelihood, lifestyle, etc.); </span><br />
<span>d)	Language (whether used as the only language, as mother-tongue, as the habitual means of communication at home or in the family, or as the main, preferred, habitual, general or normal language); </span><br />
<span>e)	Residence on certain parts of the country, or in certain regions of the world; </span><br />
<span>f)	Other relevant factors. </span><br />

On an individual basis, an indigenous person is one who belongs to these indigenous populations through self-identification as indigenous (group consciousness) and is recognized and accepted by these populations as one of its members (acceptance by the group).

This preserves for these communities the sovereign right and power to decide who belongs to them, without external interference.

Opening the category of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ to be more broadly encompassing of any community that maintains historical continuity with ancestral territories indeed allowed for greater applicability of the term, yet the observers from indigenous organizations developed a common position and rejected the idea of a formal definition of indigenous peoples that would be adopted by states.

In 2004, the Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues concluded:

The lack of formal definition of “peoples” or “minorities” has not been crucial to the Organization’s successes or failures in those domains nor to the promotion, protection or monitoring of the rights recognized for these entities.

Similarly, in the case of the concept of “indigenous peoples,” the prevailing view today is that no formal universal definition of the term is necessary. For practical purposes the understanding of the term commonly accepted is the one provided in the Martínez Cobo study mentioned above.

In keeping with this position, the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples also does not provide a specific definition of Indigenous Peoples or indigenous populations. According to the Chairperson, Ms. Erica-Irene Daes, Rapporteur of the Working Group, this was because ‘historically speaking, indigenous peoples have suffered from definitions imposed by others.’

The current international understanding of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ may best be summarized as one defined via a variety of characteristics: self-identification at the individual level and accepted by the community as their member; historical continuity with pre-colonial or pre-settler societies; a strong link to territories and surrounding natural resources; a distinct social, economic, or political system; a distinct dialect/language, culture, and beliefs; non-participation as a dominant group in national society; and possessing a resolve to maintain and reproduce their ancestral environments and systems as distinctive peoples and communities.

#### 7.3. Reconciling Russian Associations of ‘Minority Peoples’ and ‘Indigenous Peoples’ with World Bank Policy and International Law

Indigenous Peoples and Indigenous Peoples’ advocacy groups often decry the definitional approach taken by the Government of the Russian Federation. Some note that the Russian legal system does not recognize the concept ‘Indigenous Peoples’ as based on self-identification, but instead requires groups to seek inclusion into the Unified Register of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation. This process of inclusion is both bureaucratic and cumbersome: it has to be proposed by the federal subject (region/republic/province) in which the respective ethnic group lives. Indigenous Peoples advocacy groups note that there are several cases in which regional authorities refused to make such a proposal.  Also contested in the Russian state formulation of the concept of ‘Indigenous Peoples’ is the population limit of 50,000 self-identifying members as the maximum for inclusion in in the Unified Register. There are larger ethnic groups in the Russian Federation that share the characteristics and challenges of small-numbered Indigenous Peoples but that, because of the numerical population limitation stipulated by Russian law, do not enjoy the corresponding recognition or legal protections (such as priority access to natural resources such as fishing and hunting grounds).   Still another concern is the emphasis placed on maintaining a traditional way of life and inhabiting certain remote (especially Northern or Asian) regions of the country. As will be elaborated below in the section on Indigenous Peoples’ development priorities, the crux of the concern is that this necessity to adhere to traditional subsistence strategies restricts the freedom of Indigenous Peoples to engage with the modern economy and hinders their competitiveness.

In fact, the definitions of “Indigenous Peoples” utilized by both the government of Russia and by the World Bank are prescriptive. As noted above—and as expressly articulated by OP 4.10—the intention of both the World Bank and the Government of the Russian Federation is to establish a bounded legal category—in operational terms—that sets the limits of policy application.

When operating in the Russian Federation, the World Bank needs to be prepared that, given a political environment bounded by Russian legislation and civil society awareness, the presence of any KMNRF community (that is, any community listed in the Unified Register of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation) to be affected by a project will automatically invoke the policy.  Furthermore, when examining safeguard applicability in project contexts, OP 4.10 could be triggered by the presence of distinct and vulnerable sociocultural groups not on the Unified Register that exhibit one or more of the four defining characteristics of ‘Indigenous Peoples’—self-identification as indigenous; collective attachment to ancestral territories; reliance on distinctive cultural, economic, social or political institutions; and/or community use of a distinctive language.  Just as it would for any project, an appropriate social assessment process to ascertain the presence of any group of peoples that could be so classified as ‘Indigenous Peoples’ must precede any lending or investment decision, and OP 4.10 applied accordingly.

However, this approach, if invoked too mechanically, would lead to OP application to project situations beyond the original intent of the policy with its implicit objective of protecting vulnerable and marginalized populations; which is, in effect, the fifth, if unstated, policy indigenous characteristic. The Bank should work with the Government of Russia to devise an acceptable Social Assessment process that delineates policy application along these lines. Practical determinations of which vulnerable group would trigger the policy would be contingent on project conditions, and should involve the technical judgement of recognized external experts.

In terms of other avenues for World Bank support to the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation, a more narrowed focus on the “Small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the Russain Federation” (коренных, малочисленных народов Российкой Федерации; korennykh, malochislennykh narodov Rossiykoy Federatsii, KMNRF) is acceptable.  As will be further detailed in the sections that follow, there are many challenges to the practical application of existing Russian legal safeguards for recognized Indigenous Peoples (that is, KMNRF).  Probably the best use of Bank expertise and investment is to increase client capacity to systematically and uniformly uphold existing legal protections for KMNRF before considering a broader scope of applicability.

Further recommendations to the World Bank are provided below.


### 8.	Participation in the Developmental Process

#### 8.1. The Concept of Participation and its Limits: Issue of ‘Scope’ and ‘Applicability’

##### 8.1.1: World Bank Project Financing & Requirements for Indigenous Peoples Consultation and Participation

A central pillar of the World Bank OP 4.10 is its requirement for projects affecting Indigenous Peoples to engage in “free, prior, and informed consultation” with them. Borrowers are expected to document compliance with this requirement—demonstrating a procedure that :

(a)	establishes an appropriate gender and intergenerationally inclusive framework that provides opportunities for consultation at each stage of project preparation;
(b)	uses consultation methods  appropriate to the social and cultural values of the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities and their local conditions and, in designing these methods, gives special attention to the concerns of indigenous women, youth, and children and their access to development opportunities and benefits; and
(c)	provides the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities with all relevant information about the project in a culturally appropriate manner at each stage of project preparation and implementation.

The scope of participation within Bank-financed projects is explicitly defined as participation in the process of project preparation for the purposes of ascertaining and responding to the concerns of Indigenous Peoples.   Such participation is to be based on full disclosure about the nature and intention of proposed project activities.

The determination of which aspects of project planning must involve the direct participation of Indigenous Peoples in project design should presumably be informed by the process of free, prior, and informed consultation. OP 4.10 does not articulate the specific applicability of the participatory process. Instead, the emphasis of OP 4.10 is on engagement outcomes—that the resulting project plan be able to demonstrate that it has achieved broad community support of the affected indigenous communities.

Broad community support is seen as a necessary precondition of project approval since the Bank sees stakeholder participation in World Bank-funded projects and programs as the key for ensuring a project’s long-term sustainability. Bank development strategies emphasize that promoting participation helps build ownership and enhances transparency and accountability, and in doing so enhances effectiveness of development projects and policies. Successful community-based development requires tapping into local needs, and building on the strength of existing institutions and supporting community action.  Such activities can prove particularly important in indigenous communities.

The stipulation that this process be documented is to ensure both the transparency and verifiability of community support.

##### 8.1.2: Russian Federation Law and Requirements of Indigenous Peoples Participation

Russian federal law also requires the participation of Indigenous Peoples in developmental contexts. The federal law ‘On Guarantees of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation’ of 1999  is particularly important in this regard. ‘On Guarantees’ establishes the “framework of legal guarantees for the socio-economic and cultural development of the Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation, to protect their original habitat, traditional way of life, economy and folk art [handicrafts]” (‘On Guarantees,’ preamble). Article 8 explicates the rights granted to Indigenous Peoples, among which are provisions for their participation in developmental activities—some of which correspond to the provisions of OP 4.10:

§8.1.2.	participation in monitoring the use of various categories of land required for the traditional economic activities and traditional folk art [handicrafts] of indigenous peoples, as well as of common minerals in traditional places of residence and traditional economic activities of indigenous peoples;
§8.1.3.	participation in the implementation of federal laws and laws of the Russian Federation on environmental protection in the industrial use of land and natural resources, construction and reconstruction of economic and other objects in places of traditional residence and economic activities of indigenous peoples;
§8.1.5	through authorized representatives of indigenous peoples, participation in the preparation and adoption, by public authorities of the Russian Federation in bodies of state power of subjects of the Russian Federation and in local self-government, of solutions for the protection of original habitat, traditional way of life, farming and folk art [handicrafts] of indigenous peoples;
§8.1.6	participation in environmental and ethnological assessments utilized in the development of federal and regional government programs on natural resources and the environment in places of traditional residence and traditional economic activities of indigenous peoples;
§8.2.2	participation in the formation and activities of the councils of indigenous representatives in the executive bodies of subjects of the Russian Federation and local government bodies.

Additionally, ‘On Guarantees’ provides for the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples, via their authorized representatives, in the “development and assessment of projects of federal laws and other normative legal acts of the Russian Federation” (§5.1.1) as well as in the definition of “limitations on non-traditional economic activities of Indigenous Peoples' organizations in federally-owned places of traditional residence and economic activities of Indigenous Peoples” (§5.1.5) when such powers are exercised by federal authorities.

The right of the people affected by industrial projects, including Indigenous Peoples, to participate in the development process is affirmed for all project-affected peoples in the Regulations on Environmental Impact Assessment of planned economic and other activities on the environment in the Russian Federation.  These regulations also establish an obligation by companies to inform the public of the impact of the project on the environment, and to predict the project’s likely environmental, social and economic consequences. Under the environmental impact assessment law, public participation is required during the preparation and evaluation of the environmental impact assessment report (§2.2.5), which itself should be developed with the prior and informed consultation of affected peoples (see, for example, §2.3.1.1.).

##### 8.1.3: Commentary

Despite the legal safeguards calling for the consultative participation of Indigenous Peoples in developmental processes (including the drafting and formulation of relevant policies), there exists no unified, legally secured consultative framework. Indigenous Peoples remain underrepresented in executive and legislative bodies at the national level, and are not always extended opportunities for their representatives to participate in consultative working groups (whenever such groups are created) to review new legislation. The policy areas that affect Indigenous Peoples are distributed across various state agencies (for example, ministries and departments)  without any strategic coordination on indigenous issues, which results in uneven observation of Indigenous Peoples’ developmental priorities. More critically, the initial drafting of federal laws affecting Indigenous Peoples occurs without direct indigenous representative participation, and some observers contend that the review of already mature draft legislation does not adequately reflect adequate participatory or cooperative state engagement of Indigenous Peoples.

Some regional governments have shown sensitivity to the need to engage with Indigenous Peoples in the political process. For example, in 1996 the Khanti-Mansiysky Autonomous Region was the first region to formalize representation of Indigenous Peoples by statutorily creating the Assembly of Indigenous Peoples as a part of the structure of the regional Duma (parliament).  The region’s administration works closely under a formal agreement with the indigenous organization ‘Salvation of Yugra’ (which has 22 offices throughout the region with over 3,000 active participants) when making any decisions affecting Indigenous Peoples. Together, they have adopted a general policy on Indigenous Peoples’ rights, and over 10 laws and 40 normative acts guaranteeing the rights of Indigenous Peoples to priority and free-of-charge use of land, language education, self-organization, development of reindeer herding, and promoting the pursuit of traditional activities.  Khabarovsky Krai has similarly established an indigenous body with consultative status in the Governor’s office: the Regional Council of Representatives of Indigenous Peoples of the Governor’s Office (created in 2003 under the regional law ‘On Representation of Indigenous Peoples’). Each village elects representatives for its municipal council, and the heads of municipal councils sit on the Regional Council of Representatives of Indigenous Peoples, currently consisting of 15 members. All decisions of the Government of Khabarovsky Krai that have to do with Indigenous Peoples are discussed in consultation with the Council, and the Council can make proposals to regional and federal legislative bodies.


### 9.	Areas Requiring Special Consideration

In continuation of the pattern established by the preceding chapters of Part IV, each component discussion under this section will juxtapose World Bank OP 4.10 policy requirements with counterpart policies and regulations in the Russian Federation legal system.  The title of this section and each sub-section heading reflects corresponding heading and organizational divisions of OP 4.10 (paragraphs 16-22).

#### 9.1. Lands and Related Natural Resources

##### 9.1.1: World Bank Policy

Recognizing that “Indigenous Peoples are closely tied to land, forests, water, wildlife, and other natural resources,” OP 4.10 requires projects that ‘affect such ties’ to pay particular attention to:

<span>(a)	the customary rights of the Indigenous Peoples, both individual and collective, pertaining to lands or territories that they traditionally owned, or customarily used or occupied, and where access to natural resources is vital to the sustainability of their cultures and livelihoods;</span><br />
<span>(b)	the need to protect such lands and resources against illegal intrusion or encroachment;</span><br />
<span>(c)	the cultural and spiritual values that the Indigenous Peoples attribute to such lands and resources; and</span><br />
<span>(d)	Indigenous Peoples’ natural resources management practices and the long-term sustainability of such practices.</span><br />

OP 4.10 also specifies that for projects involving (a) activities that are contingent on establishing legally recognized rights to lands and territories that Indigenous Peoples have traditionally owned or customarily used or occupied (such as land titling projects), or (b) the acquisition of such lands, a plan must be put in place to enable the legal recognition of such ownership, occupation, or usage.

##### 9.1.2: Russian Federation Law

Federal Law On Guarantees of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation of 1999  explicates certain measures that accord with the general intent of OP 4.10 paragraphs 16 and 17 requiring ‘special consideration’ for projects affecting Indigenous Peoples’ ties to lands and related natural resources. Specifically, the following rights are afforded to Indigenous Peoples groups under Article 8 of ‘On Guarantees’:

<span>§8.1.1.	free-use access, in places of traditional residence and economic activities of indigenous peoples, to various categories of land necessary to carry out their traditional economic activities and traditional folk art [handicrafts] and to commonly-occurring minerals in the manner prescribed by federal law and the legislation of the Russian Federation; [also 8.2.1.]</span><br />
<span>§8.1.2.	participation in monitoring the use of various categories of land required for the traditional economic activities and traditional folk art [handicrafts] of indigenous peoples, as well as of common minerals in traditional places of residence and traditional economic activities of indigenous peoples;</span><br />
<span>§8.1.3.	participation in the implementation of federal laws and laws of the Russian Federation on Environmental Protection in the industrial use of land and natural resources, construction and reconstruction of economic and other objects in places of traditional residence and economic activities of indigenous peoples;</span><br />
<span>§8.1.4.	access, from authorities of the Russian Federation, bodies of state power of subjects of the Russian Federation, local authorities, organizations of all forms of ownership, international organizations, NGOs and individuals, to material and financial resources needed for socio-economic and cultural development of indigenous peoples, protection of their original habitat, traditional way of life, farming and fisheries;</span><br />
<span>§8.1.8.	compensation for damages suffered as a result of damage to the native habitat of indigenous peoples' economic activities by organizations of all forms of ownership  and by individuals; [also 8.2.3.]</span><br />
<span>§8.2.4.	as necessary for the protection of minorities of their original habitat, traditional way of life, farming and fisheries, use of quotas on land usage and environmental management, established by federal legislation, the legislation of the Russian Federation and normative legal acts of local government bodies.</span><br />

As the name of the law suggests, these provisions are minimal ‘guarantees’ of the rights of Indigenous Peoples affected by developmental activities. Their intention, however, appears to roughly approximate the aims of OP 4.10 paragraphs 16 and 17 insofar as they require—as a matter of federal policy—that Indigenous People retain access to their customary territories for the purposes of traditional economic activity, to participate in the enforcement of state legal protections, and to retain access to material and financial resources to maintain such areas.

Yet in specific regard to land tenure and ownership in the Russian Federation, the central legal act is the 2001 Land Code (Земельний кодекс;  *zemel'nyi kodeks*),  which rules out any form of land tenure other than rent and private property stating (§20) “Citizens cannot be granted permanent (indefinite) use [rights] over plots of land. Judicial persons, except those named under item 1 of this provision are obliged to have their right to permanent (indefinite) use of land plots transferred into the right to rent (право аренды; *pravo arendy*) the given plots or to obtain the plots as property.” [Incidentally, this formulation runs counter to another provision of the Code (§12) that defines land as a public good “to be preserved as the basis of the life and the activities of the peoples inhabiting the respective territory.”] The contradictions of the Land Code with the provisions of ‘On Guarantees’ create severe difficulties for KMNRF in asserting their rights to land and resources. Yet, government representatives also maintain that despite the fact that the current version of the Land Code has been operational for several years, indigenous groups rarely pay any fees as a practical matter.

Similarly, the concept of “Territories of Traditional Nature Use” (территория традиционного природопользования; *territoriya traditsionnogo prirodopol’zovaniya*, abbreviated TTP) established under On Territories of Traditional Nature Use of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Russian Far East  is not carried out in practice. In theory—while not amounting to full recognition of indigenous ownership of their given territories—the formation of TTPs would at least serve to institute co-management regimes, granting indigenous communities certain decision-making powers over a given territory and installing a minimum level of protection against unmitigated industrial exploitation by third parties. Since the law was adopted over a decade ago, in 2001,  only a few such territories have been created (in Khanty-Mansiysk, the Republic of Sakha [Yakutia], Khabarovsk Krai, and the Nenets AO)—a fact that Russian authorities attribute to the absence of the necessary administrative by-laws.  Moreover, a draft policy proposed by the Ministry of Regional Development jeopardizes the status of TTP as specially protected territories which Indigenous Peoples advocacy groups as well as the Federation Council and the Committee on National Affairs of the State Duma all note contradicts the Russian federal government instruction dated April 14, 2009 [No.ДК-П-16-2033] which implied that there would be a special focus on retaining the status of specially protected territories in the course of developing the new version of the law.  Removing the status of protected areas deprives the TTP environmental protections.

##### 9.1.3: Commentary

The right to secure land and resource tenure is considered to be one of the most fundamental human rights for Indigenous Peoples. It is a right grounded in general human rights principles of equality, property and cultural integrity that are incorporated within several of the multilateral treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party.  The creation of a legal environment which ensures full respect for Indigenous Peoples' traditional ownership, access and use rights has been the main aspiration of indigenous organizations since the inception of the Russian indigenous movement in the late 1980s.  It is also an issue that remains unresolved in Russia.

The overwhelming majority of Indigenous Peoples have no permanent legal rights over the land and natural resources that they depend on for their survival. Although the constitution of the Russian Federation allows for varied forms of land and natural resources ownership (private, state, municipal and otherwise), most of the land and subsoil resources in Russia are the property of the state. Agricultural, forest, pasture and other land parcels utilized by private entities are primarily leased from the government. Indigenous peoples’ rights to lands and natural resources are consistent with this general framework; they are accorded rights to use the land and its renewable and common resources while title ownership remains with the state.

The Federal law ‘On Territories’ provides that the land an indigenous community utilizes for traditional economic activities may be granted a special legal designation of “territory of traditional nature use” and be assigned to that community to use free-of-charge for a certain renewable period of time. The Indigenous People living in these territories are guaranteed the right to continue to occupy the land and use its renewable resources for traditional activities, the right to participate in decision-making when industrial development in the territory is considered, and the right to receive compensation when industrial development that interferes with their access to land or damages the environment occurs. Also significant, the law ‘On Territories’ provides that when designated traditional nature use territories are established, oil and other industrial development may occur only after consultation and agreement with the indigenous communities living there.

There is, however, a lack of congruence among Russian Federation laws with regard to how land and tenure are to be established. The formulation of the land as a public good under the 2001 Land Code §12 runs contrary to forms of land ownership enshrined in Indigenous Peoples' own customary law as it provides no room for the recognition of an Indigenous People or community as a collective rights-holder.  This provision also acts as a major obstacle to the realisation of land use rights of Indigenous Peoples, enshrined in other federal laws, namely the Federal law ‘On Guarantees of the Rights of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples,’  which provides certain privileges regarding land tenure and use of natural resources, including the right of Indigenous Peoples to use land free of charge at places traditionally inhabited and used by them; and the Federal law On Territories of Traditional Nature Use of Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation.  With regard to the federal law On Territories of Traditional Natural Resource Use of the Small Indigenous Minorities of the North, there is little evidence of progress toward defining workable implementing measures. Indigenous organisations in Russia regard the implementation of this law as an important—but by itself insufficient—step towards providing them with some degree of control over on-going developments in their territories and to ensure the protection and full realisation of their right to adequate food and to subsistence (as provided under Article 11 and Art. 1.2, respectively, of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights).

There are also few bylaws or procedures specifying methods for policy implementation. On-going reforms to the land regime at the federal level sometimes have the result of codifying conflicting or inconsistent legal and regulatory regimes, which casts significant legal uncertainty on the status of indigenous rights in existing regional territories of traditional use.  For example, even in places where areas of traditional nature use have been designated, Indigenous Peoples may still be subject to licensing and auctioning regimes that force them to bid for hunting and fishing licenses in competition with non-indigenous (usually commercial) interests, without any priority given to traditional hunting or fishing practices.  Further, in some places, fishing and hunting licenses are issued with quotas that are grossly insufficient to meet nutritional needs. As a result, indigenous communities experience problems realizing their access to the resources that they depend on for their livelihood.

Beyond the matter of territorial rights are those of hunting rights  and access to forest  and aquatic resources  which are also regulated by codes which define similar limitations to the concepts of usufruct and ownership and obligate indigenous obshchinas to participate in commercial tenders for hunting and fishing grounds with usually more competitive private businesses. These legislative developments substantially endanger the continued access of Indigenous Peoples to their sources of subsistence, food and income.  In such cases where the policies and practices of the federal government and regional governments diverge, the legal weight of regulations introduced by regional administrations is often unclear, especially in those cases where different regional and/or federal laws have conflicting provisions but also because much of the land inhabited or used by Indigenous Peoples is under the jurisdiction of the federal government rather than the regional administration.

Another factor affecting Indigenous Peoples’ access to lands and natural resources has been the establishment of parks or nature reserves on the basis of conservationist objectives. In some areas, such as in the Beloyarski municipality in Khanti- Mansiyski, the establishment of state nature parks has been viewed as positive, since it has kept areas free from industrial development and resource extraction, while allowing traditional activities to continue. However, in other areas, such as the Sinda village in Khabarovsky Krai, specially protected nature parks have been in conflict with the interests of the Indigenous Peoples who traditionally have used resources from these areas.


#### 9.2. Commercial Development of Natural and Cultural Resources

##### 9.2.1: World Bank Policy

For projects involving “the commercial development of natural resources…on lands or territories that Indigenous Peoples traditionally owned, or customarily used or occupied” as well as for projects involving “the commercial development of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural resources and knowledge,” OP 4.10 (paragraph 18) requires that borrowers—through a process of free, prior, and informed consultation—inform project affected communities of:

<span>(a)	their rights to such resources under statutory and customary law; </span><br />
<span>(b)	the scope and nature of the proposed commercial development and the parties interested or involved in such development; and </span><br />
<span>(c)	the potential effects of such development on the Indigenous Peoples’ livelihoods, environments, and use of such resources. </span><br />

For those projects involving “the commercial development of natural resources…on lands or territories that Indigenous Peoples traditionally owned, or customarily used or occupied,” OP 4.10 requires borrowers to establish arrangements ‘to enable the Indigenous Peoples to share equitably in the benefits to be derived from such commercial development,’ which, at a minimum, are to include ‘benefits, compensation, and rights to due process at least equivalent to that to which any landowner with full legal title to the land would be entitled in the case of commercial development on their land.’

For those projects involving ‘the commercial development of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural resources and knowledge,’ OP 4.10 provides that ‘Commercial development of the cultural resources and knowledge of these Indigenous Peoples is conditional upon their prior agreement to such development.’ The nature and content borrower agreements with Indigenous Peoples must be documented in the project’s Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) along with specification of ‘arrangements to enable Indigenous Peoples to receive benefits in a culturally appropriate way and share equitably in the benefits to be derived from such commercial development.’

##### 9.2.2: Russian Federation Law

The rights and safeguards under the Federal Law ‘On Guarantees’ are extended not only to Indigenous Peoples’ use of, access to, and title of customary lands and related natural resources (as discussed in the preceding section) but also to the cultural development of such lands and resources—including cultural resources.  In addition to the provisions cited above (‘On Guarantees’ §8.1.1. - §8.1.4., §8.1.8., §8.2.1., §8.2.3. - §8.2.4.), two additional provisions are relevant:

§8.2.6.	in the manner prescribed by civil legislation, create economic partnerships and associations, industrial and consumer cooperatives, to engage in traditional economic activities and fisheries between indigenous peoples and non-indigenous persons, provided that the organization has not less than half the jobs given to indigenous peoples;
§8.2.7.	acquire primary ownership of organizations of traditional economic and traditional handicraft institutions of indigenous peoples in their places of traditional residence and economic activity.

To objectively assess the extent of exposure of Indigenous Peoples to risks imposed by potential development projects on their lands and territories, the Ministry of Regional Development on December 9, 2009 adopted Order № 565, Methodology calculating the amount of damages to all forms of property and individuals caused to associations of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Russian Far East as a result of economic and other activities of organizations in places of traditional residence and economic activities of Indigenous Peoples of the Russian Federation.

In relation to cultural resources—and Indigenous Knowledge more specifically—the Federal Law On Information, Information Technologies and Information Protection promulgated on July 27, 2006 preserves for the owner of intellectual propery the right to allow or restrict access to information, to determine the terms and conditions of such access, to control the use of such information, including its spread, and protects the statutory rights of its owner in the event of unlawful receipt of information or its misuse by other persons (Article 6, Part 3). Dissemination of such information must be accompanied by accreditation of its ownership in a form and amount sufficient to identify it (Article 10, Part 3).

##### 9.2.3: Commentary

The territories inhabited by Indigenous Peoples of the North are affected by an on-going expansion of industrial operations, mostly in the extractive industries. Indigenous Peoples and their representative organizations note that such industrial activity often occurs without prior consultation with Indigenous Peoples about planned activities—let alone adequate compensation or consensual benefits-sharing arrangements. This situation is exacerbated by both federal and regional government bodies’ lack of appropriate guidelines and the legislative provisions that exist carrying no sanctions for their violation. Recent reports of industrial operations in indigenous territories operating without consultation, consent or even information sharing have come from Tomsk oblast, Yamal Nenets okrug, Altai republic, the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), Kamchatka territory, and Sakhalin oblast.

To compound the complexities of managing industrial operations in Indigenous Peoples’ territories, the Federal Ministry of Regional Development is currently promoting changes to federal fishery legislation, which de facto ban obshchinas from selling their produce and thus from generating income for their employees. As noted above, according to three federal laws adopted or revised since 2001 (the Forestry Code , the Federal Law On Fishing and Conservation of Water Biological Resources  and the Federal Law On the Conservation of Hunting Grounds and Amendments to Specific Regulations of the Russian Federation ) all forest, hunting and fishing areas, including those in the territories inhabited by Indigenous Peoples, may be granted to commercial companies on the basis of long-term licenses obtained by tender. The duration of such licenses is usually 20 years or more, meaning that even if the government takes measures to implement the law on TTPs, many of the land areas and resources necessary for the Indigenous Peoples are already under private control, protected by long-term contracts. The Land Code, Forestry Code and Water Code have no norms to limit tenders and auctions of land, forest and water areas in the territories where Indigenous Peoples live and the natural resources they use—effectively reducing the hunting grounds and pastures for Indigenous Peoples. Moreover, the law has no regulation that obliges the license holders to provide access for indigenous users to their areas. Such legislation creates grounds for endless conflicts and lawsuits where Indigenous Peoples have to defend their right to traditional livelihood.

In many regions, Indigenous Peoples establish small local community-based enterprises called obshchinas.  In small, remote indigenous settlements, obshchinas serve as the only source of employment and income. Since 2008, however, obshchinas have lost their access to fishing, hunting areas and pastures in many regions and, with this, their economic basis for development.

Access to fish stocks and fishing grounds is especially critical, as fish constitute the single most important source of nutrients for many Indigenous Peoples, as well as being an integral part of traditional ways of life. In spite of this right being protected by federal law,  fishing authorities instead pursue highly restrictive policies and impose often arbitrary and non-transparent restriction on indigenous fish-dependent communities that make any meaningful perpetuation of traditional fishing practices impossible. For example, even though the law ‘On Fishing’ says that Indigenous Peoples do not require fishing permits for private consumption, the practice of the Russian authorities is to annually determine per capita quotas for ecological reasons, and Indigenous People are usually required to obtain individual permits, even for personal consumption. The policy is very restrictive and sanctions, including fines and confiscation of equipment, are frequently reported.

The principal flaws of such quota systems can be summarized as follows:

*	Lack of transparency and participation: Quotas and their durations and effective areas of coverage are determined by the authorities without participation of the Indigenous Peoples; decisions may come at short notice and appeals may not be heeded or even answered.
*	Inaccessibility: The procedures for obtaining quotas are often either prohibitively bureaucratic or require travel to a distant central settlement or town, which Indigenous People may be unable to afford.
*	Insufficient quotas: The annual quotas often constitute just a fraction of what would be an acceptable minimum with regards to the Indigenous Peoples' nutritional and cultural needs.
*	Inadequate and unrealistic conditions attached to the quota: Permits may be issued partly or exclusively for species which do not occur at a given place; places may be assigned which are inaccessible; fishing permits may be received only after the season has ended, etc.; failure to comply with the imposed restrictions is sanctioned by fines or confiscation of equipment.
*	Denial of permits: In some regions, authorities withhold issuance of fishing permits unless a person is able to document her or his indigenous identity; since the removal of the ‘nationality’ entry from Russian passports, there is no standard way of doing so.



#### 9.3. Physical Relocation of Indigenous Peoples

##### 9.3.1: World Bank Policy

Recognizing that “physical relocation of Indigenous Peoples is particularly complex and may have significant adverse impacts on their identity, culture, and customary livelihoods,” OP 4.10 requires borrowers “to explore alternative project designs to avoid physical relocation of Indigenous Peoples.” In those “exceptional circumstances, when it is not feasible to avoid relocation” borrower relocation must have “broad support” from the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities as part of the free, prior, and informed consultation process. OP 4.10 further specifies that:

In such cases, the borrower prepares a resettlement plan in accordance with the requirements of OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement that is compatible with the Indigenous Peoples’ cultural preferences, and includes a land-based resettlement strategy. As part of the resettlement plan, the borrower documents the results of the consultation process. Where possible, the resettlement plan should allow the affected Indigenous Peoples to return to the lands and territories they traditionally owned, or customarily used or occupied, if the reasons for their relocation cease to exist.

OP 4.10 also provides that involuntary restrictions on Indigenous Peoples’ access to lands and territories, and particularly restrictions that would impede Indigenous Peoples access to their sacred sites are to be avoided. In those “exceptional circumstances, when it is not feasible to avoid restricting access,” borrowers are required to prepare—with the free, prior, and informed consultation of the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities—a process framework in accordance with the provisions of OP 4.12. Specifically:

The process framework provides guidelines for preparation, during project implementation, of an individual parks and protected areas’ management plan, and ensures that the Indigenous Peoples participate in the design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the management plan, and share equitably in the benefits of the parks and protected areas. The management plan should give priority to collaborative arrangements that enable the Indigenous, as the custodians of the resources, to continue to use them in an ecologically sustainable manner.

##### 9.3.2: Russian Federation Law

Contrary to contemporary international norms  requiring consent or the broad support of indigenous communities prior to the authorization of projects involving their resettlement or relocation, Russian legislation does not require the Indigenous Peoples' free prior and informed consent, nor does it prescribe the conduct of social impact assessments as an element of the project approval procedure.

However, the Federal Law On Territories of Traditional Nature Use of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East provides that “In case of withdrawal of land plots and other isolated natural resources located within the borders of the territories of traditional nature for public use to persons belonging to minority peoples, communities and Indigenous Peoples are to be granted equivalent lands and other natural resources, and compensated the losses caused by such withdrawal” (Article 12). Articles 9, 15, 24 protect the interests of Indigenous Peoples, requiring the selection and identification of areas of special areas to be used for the conduct of traditional economic activities.

##### 9.3.3: Commentary

The lack of protections for Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation against government or private sector project-related involuntary relocations is a serious issue as physical displacement can cause irreparable damage to a way of life if access to ancestral territories is severed. Having already been subject to large-scale relocations during the Soviet period that severely underminded their cultural integrity, indigenous lifeways are extremely vulnerable to any further disruption. Experience in Russia and globally has shown that special measures need to be enacted when Indigenous Peoples are threatened with involuntary physical displacement.

Under current situations in the Russian Federation, however, physical displacement of indigenous communities is more likely to occur due to project-induced changes in land use rather than by official government fiat. This is what happened in the case of the Evenk when a local coal mining company built a railroad across the land where the community grazed their reindeer and the community was forced to relocate with their herds to avoid the railroad and associated project activities. Although this was not due to direct project impacts, these induced impacts still had serious impacts on the local population.

Another example of a project where the lack of consultation with or consent from Indigenous Peoples raised serious issues in terms of physical displacement was the program for the construction of the Evenkiiskaia hydroelectric dam on the Lower Tunguska river in Krasnoyarsk province, to be implemented by RusHydro. This dam would have created the world’s largest artificial lake, submerging a number of Evenki settlements as well as Tura, the regional center, and potentially destroying much of the fish resources, forested area, and reindeer pasture which constituted the main sources of subsistence and livelihood for the Evenki population. The project was also widely criticized for the substantial environmental risks involved and for the involuntary dislocation of the indigenous population. An overwhelming majority of the impacted population strongly opposed the project. After years of contention, with different organisations supporting opponents of the dam because of its negative effects on the customary lifestyle of the local Indigenous Peoples, the dam project was canceled—or at least frozen for the next decade and more. ,   Similar situations may arise for projects online for Altay, Kamchatka, Khabarovsk, and Yakutia.

There are some key issues that may arise when a project includes physical displacement:

*	The need for pursuing a project planning strategy that avoids or minimizes the scope of displacement.
*	Engagement of the indigenous project-affected communities in planning and decision-making regarding the entire displacement process, including determining the degree of support that local communities need to give to the project for it to be carried forward.
*	Determination of the full roster of project-induced social and ecological effects.
*	Planning for adequate replacement subsistence and/or employment strategies.
*	Determination of adequate compensation amounts and methods.
*	Monitoring and enforcement of resettlement agreements.
*	Possibility to return to original settlements once the need for relocation has passed.


#### 9.4. Other Avenues for World Bank Developmental Assistance

##### 9.4.1: World Bank Policy

OP 4.10 provides that, at a member country’s request, the Bank may support the country in its development planning and poverty reduction strategies by providing financial assistance for a variety of initiatives designed to:

<span>(a)	strengthen local legislation, as needed, to establish legal recognition of the customary or traditional land tenure systems of Indigenous Peoples; </span><br />
<span>(b)	make the development process more inclusive of Indigenous Peoples by incorporating their perspectives in the design of development programs and poverty reduction strategies, and providing them with opportunities to benefit more fully from development programs through policy and legal reforms, capacity-building, and free, prior, and informed consultation and participation; </span><br />
<span>(c)	support the development priorities of Indigenous Peoples through programs (such as community-driven development programs and locally managed social funds) developed by governments in cooperation with Indigenous Peoples; </span><br />
<span>(d)	address the gender and intergenerational issues that exist among many Indigenous Peoples, including the special needs of indigenous women, youth, and children; </span><br />
<span>(e)	prepare participatory profiles of Indigenous Peoples to document their culture, demographic structure, gender and intergenerational relations and social organization, institutions, production systems, religious beliefs, and resource use patterns; </span><br />
<span>(f)	strengthen the capacity of Indigenous Peoples’ communities and IPOs to prepare, implement, monitor, and evaluate development programs; </span><br />
<span>(g)	strengthen the capacity of government agencies responsible for providing development services to Indigenous Peoples; </span><br />
<span>(h)	protect indigenous knowledge, including by strengthening intellectual property rights; </span><br />
<span>(i)	facilitate partnerships among the government, IPOs, CSOs, and the private sector to promote Indigenous Peoples’ development programs. </span><br />

##### 9.4.2: Russian Federation Law

The 2009 Federal Decree on the Concept of the Sustainable Development of the Small Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation  is a key document in terms of establishing the main principles of Russian national policy towards the protection of rights of the KMNSSDV. The Concept Paper was formulated by the Ministry of Regional Development with interested federal executive authorities, as well as with the participation of RAIPON. ,

The main objectives of this policy statement are to strengthen the social and economic potential of KMNSSDV and to protect the environment, traditional lifestyle and cultural values of Indigenous Peoples with government support as well as through mobilization of the internal resources of the peoples themselves. The Concept Paper principles in pursuit of sustainable development are described in Section 3  as follows:

-	guaranteeing the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North, in conformity with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the universally-recognized principles and norms of the international law and the international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party;
-	providing an integrated approach to resolving complex problems of social and economic and ethno-cultural development of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North;
-	coordinating actions of the public and local government authorities toward resolving the problems of socio-economic and ethno-cultural development of small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North;
-	ensuring active participation of the small Indigenous Peoples of the North in achieving their sustainable development goals;
-	recognising the value of land and other natural resources (including biological resources) and environmental well-being as the basis of the traditional lifestyles and traditional economic activities of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North;
-	sound management of land and other natural resources in traditional habitat and the areas of traditional economic activities;
-	recognising the right of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North to priority access to fishing and hunting grounds, and to biological resources in their places of traditional residence and traditional economic activities;
-	participation of the representatives and the associations of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North in making decisions on their rights and interests while exploring natural resources in traditional habitat and the areas of traditional economic activities;
-	obligatory estimation of cultural, ecological and social consequences of the suggested projects and activities in traditional habitat and the areas of traditional economic activities of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North;
-	compensation for damages to the traditional environment, traditional lifestyle and the health of the small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North.

Some observers believe the Government of the Russian Federation’s approval of the Concept Paper is a significant and positive development, noting that for the first time the Government of the Russian Federation clearly established its own standard for implementation of its public policies to protect the rights of Indigenous Peoples. In addition, the Concept Paper for the first time provided not only direct government support for Indigenous Peoples, but also facilitated the mobilization of domestic resources.

##### 9.4.3: Commentary

Russian national policy aims for development assistance to small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North as defined in the Concept Paper largely coincide with those provided in OP 4.10. Yet, in spite of the legislative improvements envisioned in the Concept Paper—and especially the 2009-2011 Action Plan for the Implementation of the Concept of the Sustainable Development of Small-numbered Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation —by the end of 2011 little had been accomplished to help realize these objectives. Among the specific actions expected in the period from 2009-2011 legislative improvements were the following:

1.	development of the required regulatory documents to establish territories for traditional use of natural resources by Indigenous Peoples, according to the Federal Law on TTP;
2.	establishment of model territories for TTP;
3.	development of a Relationship Strategy between representatives of Indigenous Peoples and industrial companies operating in their territories and regulations governing compensation for losses sustained by Indigenous Peoples through damage to their traditional living environment and thereby their traditional way of life;
4.	preparation of proposals to amend the Forest Code, Land Code and Water Code in relation to Indigenous Peoples’ access to the territories necessary for their traditional economic activities and livelihood at no cost to them;
5.	development of a draft federal law to ensure priority access for Indigenous Peoples, their communities and other indigenous associations to hunting grounds, game, fishing areas and water resources on their traditional land;
6.	development of regulations related to documents confirming Indigenous Peoples’ nationalities;
7.	development of proposals concerning forms of representation for Indigenous Peoples in the legislative (representative) bodies of the public authorities in the Russian Federation’s provinces.

	Legislative proposals developed by the Ministry of Regional Development (MINREG) over the period 2009-2011 relating to the first five items on the above list were inconsistent with existing laws and consequently rejected by the government. MINREG proposed draft laws that further derogated the rights granted by current legislation. For example, according to a new draft law on territories of traditional nature use, which would replace the law of 2001, the TTPs would lose their status as specially protected territories, which would mean depriving them of their environmental protection. This contradicts the Russian federal government instruction dated April 14, 2009, No.ДК-П-16-2033, which implied that there would be a special focus on retaining the status of specially protected territories in the course of developing the new version of the law.  Furthermore, the proposed draft law on TTPs prevents KMNSSDV from implementing their initiative to establish TTPs and the possibility of TTP joint management. The provincial and municipal authorities will lose their power to establish TTPs at the regional and local levels. Consequently, the legitimacy of already established TTPs, in some regions, is jeopardized. MINREG has been elaborating this draft law for three years, but it has never been presented to the State Duma. In practice, this behaviour prevents implementation of the 2001 law on traditional territories and thus the establishment of TTPs. As noted above, as of 2011, only a few such territories had been established.

Legislative initiatives concerning items 6 and 7 have also not been carried forward. RAIPON’s legislative proposals for these items have been rejected. As for the draft laws on fishing and hunting, these only allow Indigenous Peoples to fish and hunt for food, without the right to sell the surplus, as has been the practice for the past 300 years. Consequently, in 2011, the government’s plans for Russia’s Indigenous Peoples were not fulfilled and the expected legislative reform regulating indigenous peoples’ rights never materialised.

##### 9.4.4: Key Ministries Responsible for Indigenous Peoples

No one ministry or agency is responsible at the national level for all indigenous issues. Instead there are a number of departments that share such responsibility and often act at cross-purposes. The table below lists the key players in the Government of the Russian Federation, the Presidential Administration, and in the Duma.  Those agencies held by indigenous observers to be the most critical are indicated by italics.

----

AGENCY / OFFICE	KEY INDIGENOUS-RELATED FUNCTION

Government of the Russian Federation

Ministry of Regional Development	Coordinates Indigenous Peoples policy and legislation at the federal level; prepares KMNRF and KMNSSDV lists; coordinates federal subsidy program to regional budgets for Indigenous Peoples.
Ministry of Natural Resources (Environment)
•	Department of State Policy for Hunting and Wildlife	Coordinates laws and regulations on hunting.
•	Federal Service for Supervision of Natural Resources 	Checks compliance with environmental legislation; source of ecological expertise.
•	Federal Forestry Agency	Responsible for forested areas' development.
Ministry of Agriculture
•	Federal Fisheries Agency 	Responsible for supervision of water biological resources, including registers and tenders for fishing grounds.
Ministry of Culture	Cultural preservation.
Ministry of Education and Science	Educational standards.
Ministry of Public Health	Public health, including policy.
Ministry of Labour and Social Protection	Includes provisions for special KMNSSDV pensions.
Ministry of the Far East	Coordination of major investment projects in the Far East.

Presidential Administration of the Russian Federation

Commissioner's Office of the President in the Federal Districts (Far Eastern, Siberian, Ural)	Monitoring compliance with federal laws regarding KMNSSDV.
Internal Policy Management of the Presidential Administration	Monitors compliance with federal laws dealing with KMNSSDV; responsible for harmonizing Indigenous Peoples policies.

State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation

Committee on Federal Form, Regional Policy, Local Government, and Northern Affairs	Legislation related to indigenous affairs.

----

### 10.	Bank Experience Applying the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OD 4.20 and OP 4.10) in Russia

#### 10.1. Recent OP 4.10 Application in Russia

Since the Bank started working in Russia, few projects have touched areas inhabited by Indigenous Peoples, as the Bank’s portfolio has been focused almost exclusively in the more European west-of-the-Urals section of the country. Two oil pipeline rehabilitation projects, though, repaired pipelines in Western Siberia that travel through traditional territories of Indigenous Peoples. An indigenous emergency response team was trained under the second pipeline rehabilitation project, but the interests of Indigenous Peoples were not otherwise distinguished from those of the rest of the population. Two subsequent projects (one in oil development and another in highway improvement) triggered OD 4.20 in the preparatory assessment process, but one was dropped before appraisal and the other never became effective.

Russia was the site of three public consultations in 2001 to review the first main draft of OP/BP 4.10. The Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East (RAIPON) organized public consultations in Khabarovsk and in Naryan Mar, which coincided with RAIPON’s national gathering of leaders of local indigenous organizations. This collaboration established an ongoing dialogue between Indigenous Peoples leaders and the Bank’s Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Regional Department and its Safeguards Unit. Since the consultations in 2001, RAIPON has sponsored a number of workshops and roundtables on Indigenous Peoples issues, especially related to extractive industries, at which Bank and IFC representatives have been invited to participate. Both RAIPON and regional Indigenous Peoples organizations have disseminated OP 4.10 and used the policy as a framework in discussions with regional governments and developers in their attempts to gain recognition of their traditional use rights and protect their traditional habitats from incursion and exploitation by others.

In 2002, the ECA Regional Department commissioned a preliminary review of the ethnic composition of each country and a review of constitutions and major legislation to determine whether or not Indigenous Peoples are recognized in any of the countries. This preliminary review demonstrated the difficulty of applying the policy (OD 4.20 at that time) in the region and found virtually no legal basis to trigger the policy in any country except the Russian Federation.

The Russian legal framework differs from those of other countries in the region in that it recognizes particular concerns and rights of Indigenous People, including groups that have already been considered under the Bank’s OD 4.20 and OP 4.10. Given this history, OP 4.10 thus applies unambiguously to some people located in the northern and far eastern areas of the Russian Federation. As noted previously in this report, 40 groups, with a total population of over 250,000, are recognized by the Government of the Russian Federation as “Small in Number Peoples of the North, Siberia and Far East of Russia” while 47 groups with over 300,000 people are recognized as the somewhat larger category of “Small in Number Peoples of the Russian Federation.” The classification is limited to indigenous groups with a population of less than 50,000 to distinguish them from other larger groups that inhabit regions named after them, such as Yakutia (Yakuts) and Tuva (Tuvinians). While these larger groups have characteristics that might lead to their classification as Indigenous Peoples in other places, this has not been the practice in Russia due to the political and historical circumstances discussed above (see especially Section 4).

Experience has shown that project teams need to first determine which groups will be affected by project activities and bear in mind the original intent of the policy as they consider Bank policy application. Bank policy was developed to protect people whose culture, social organization and economy are inextricably bound to a particular territorial and ecological context and whose physical and cultural survival can be jeopardized by investments that significantly alter the physical base on which the people are dependent. While these ties of Indigenous Peoples are being slowly undermined in many areas of the country, assistance to Indigenous Peoples in Russia to protect their resources, central to their cultural and economic survival, is an important area for future support to enhance their rights and wellbeing in the context of national development.

Despite the strong legal basis for recognizing Indigenous Peoples, however, there are uncertainties regarding policy application. Implementing agencies, as well as Bank task teams, often struggle to determine if the policy is applicable to a given project and, if so, how the policy is best implemented to address issues pertaining to Indigenous Peoples and to enhance project sustainability. The Bank is therefore committed to working with the government and Indigenous Peoples of Russia to enhance application of the policy and support implementing agencies by adopting a more integrated and consistent portfolio-wide approach for applying and implementing the policy.

The application of the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples increased significantly in Fiscal Year 2011/2012 as World Bank activities expand to the eastern and northern parts of Russia. During the past year, both the Forest Fire Response Project in Khabarovsk and the FBS on Education in Yakutiahave triggered the policy. Brief summaries of these OP 4.10 applications are given below.

The first project, the Forest Fire Response Project (Forest Project-2) , is a GEF forest fire management project in the Far East that covers some areas classified as ‘Traditional Use’ areas and for which an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared. Project implementation has been slow, however.

The project is located in 15 regions but screening for Indigenous Peoples’ presence in the areas of project implementation revealed Indigenous Peoples are found only in the Khabarovsk Kray. In other regions Indigenous Peoples are either absent or localized in forest-poor areas, or beyond the project areas, or do not rely for their livelihood earnings on forests and forest resources due to assimilation. Seven “small peoples of the north” were found to be project-affected (Nanai, Negidals, Nivkh, Oroch, Udege, Ulch, and Evenks); for the Khabarovsk Kray, these seven peoples comprise 1.5 percent of the population (22,000 individuals).

The Bank prepared an IPPF in December 2011 to provide the framework through which negative impacts on the Indigenous Peoples will be mitigated and positive impacts enhanced based on free, prior, and informed consultations with the affected Indigenous Peoples. As part of project preparation, a social assessment was performed, which included assessments of the overall impact of project activities on the communities living in project areas, and preliminary consultations with Indigenous Peoples.

The social assessment revealed no significant negative effects of project activities, while the overall impact was considered definitely positive. For Indigenous Peoples relying significantly on hunting, fishing and other forest-related activities, a reduction in forest fires is seen as a highly valuable positive effect, which outweighs any possible temporary negative effects. However, the IPPF was still seen as necessary to ensure the full participation of Indigenous Peoples in the benefits and mitigate any potential occurrence of negative impacts (for example, during implementation of “construction and clearing of fire breaks” or forest use restrictions following from “fire management plans” developed during the project). The IPPF will guide the future development of specific Indigenous Peoples Plans as the Project specifies the precise areas to be involved and in what ways they will participate. The purpose of the IPPF is to ensure that the development process fully respects the dignity, rights, economies, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples, and that the project is able to gain the broad community support of affected Indigenous Peoples.

The second project, the Preschool Education Project for Yakutia (PEKY) , emphasizes improving the accessibility and quality of the preschool education services in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). The majority portion of the project will build kindergarten capacity in urban and rural areas alike. Constructing new kindergartens in urban areas and municipal centers, building new kindergartens in rural areas with community participation, and rebuilding other buildings to accommodate kindergartens will cost around USD 180 million. Other project components will support innovations for preschool education with a budget of nearly USD 40 million.

According to the Russia 2002 Census, Yakutia was inhabited by 127 ethnicities with Yakuts (45.6 percent) and Russians (41.1 percent), the major populations, with Indigenous Peoples (primarily Evens, Evenks, and Yukagir) comprising the bulk of the remaining population. The Indigenous Peoples policy was triggered since out of 93 potential locations for kindergartens 17 have either majority or a significant portion of indigenous population. As not all specific locations were determined at the time of Project Preparation, an IPPF will be prepared for this project.

The project will emphasize educational innovation approaches that will, in accordance with Yakutia regional law, be in conformity with the cultural preferences of the area’s local cultural groups. The project hopes to bring in models of pre-school and kindergarten education for nomadic and scattered groups, based on the Bank’s extensive international knowledge base, which introduce inclusive and participatory processes which will make such education available for all students. The Bank too can learn from the good practice examples of the regional government which has pioneered establishing distance-learning educational points located in the ‘yurta’ of the local populations.

