
Independence

While all of the mechanisms embody language that reflects the importance of independence, their structures and the resulting levels of independence differ. For determinations of compliance with the IFIs policies and procedures, three of the mechanisms explicitly report to the IFI’s president or vice president (CAO, EIB, OPIC), four explicitly report to the board (ADB, EBRD, IADB, IP), while the AfDB splits reporting in a hybrid form, depending on the stage of the project (see Figure 1).


With regard to problem-solving, the mechanisms that report to the president are the CAO, OPIC, EIB, EBRD, ADB and AfDB (depending on the stage of the project). Mechanisms that report to the board for problem-solving are the IADB and AfDB (again depending on the stage of the project).

The IAMs are structured in varying ways. All of the IAMs have a designated office, fully independent of Management, for the mechanism, except EBRD, which is housed within the Office of the Chief Compliance Officer. ADB has two designated offices: one for problem-solving and one for compliance review, each headed by its own director. AfDB, CAO, EBRD, and OPIC have one dedicated coordinator of the entire mechanism and all of its functions. IP and IADB have a dedicated administrative staff member, often called the Executive Secretary, in charge of managing the office of the mechanism, but they do not manage actual performance of problem-solving or compliance review.

The IP, IADB, ADB, and CAO each have at least one full-time person responsible for performing compliance reviews. ADB, AfDB, EBRD, IDB, and WBIP have a roster of experts or panelists who are called-upon, as needed, to conduct problem-solving and/ or compliance review. Additionally, most of the IAMs have other support staff members (“staff”) in charge of administrative tasks and/ or assisting in the problem-solving or compliance review processes.

For most mechanisms, the IFI’s president hires the director, administrator, or executive secretary of the IAM. However, an outlier is the IADB, which allocates hiring of the executive secretary to the Board. Most of the mechanisms have either president or board (or both) approval for hiring panelists and experts. EBRD, IP and ADB, demonstrate the best practice of requiring a transparent hiring process.

Many of the mechanisms have employment requirements for directors, staff and panelists in order to ensure independence. AfDB and the problem-solving office of ADB have the highest guarantees for the IAM director’s independence by requiring that the director has not worked for the institution for at least five years prior to employment at the IAM. The EBRD PCM Officer and IP secretariat staff and consultants must not have worked for the IFI for at least two years prior to employment at the mechanism. For panelists or experts, ADB has the strongest rule of a three-year ban on prior employment, while EBRD, AfDB, IP, and IADB have a two-year ban.

Regarding a post-employment ban on IAM staff, the EBRD PCM Officer requires a three-year cooling off period, and the CAO requires two. The best practice for panelist or expert subsequent employment prohibitions (as opposed to secretariat staff) is a complete ban on employment at the IFI, as seen with EBRD, ADB, and the IP. OPIC and EIB are outliers, with no bans on previous or subsequent employment at the IFI. Most of the mechanisms require staff or panelists to recuse themselves if they have a conflict of interest with a particular case.

Figure 2, x-axis is number of years, where 10 indicates full ban.
For OPIC, identification of the “decision-maker” is for compliance review is unclear. Under the Board resolution creating OPIC’s Office of Accountability, the Director of the mechanism has the authority to “draw independent conclusions and make recommendations to the President regarding OPIC compliance or future steps to resolve a conflict.” From this language, it could be interpreted that the Director is the decision-maker. However, according to OPIC’s website flowchart of the compliance review process, “[t}he Office of Accountability examines whether OPIC has complied with relevant policies in the course of design or implementation of an OPIC-supported project, with the objective of providing a basis for the President & CEO to determine whether there has been a failure to comply, and any preventative or corrective action should be taken.”  This language implies that it is the President/CEO who makes compliance review assessments.
