Transhumance Communities

Introduction

Like nomadic communities, transhumance communities are defined primarily by their mobility. However, unlike nomadic communities, where the entire family moves along changing routes, transhumance mobility is more defined by its regularity. Transhumance is defined as “an oscillating, seasonal movement of livestock under the care of herders, following precise routes in order to exploit pastoral resources.”  Reasons for transhumance, many of which are linked to geographical and meteorological factors, include:

•	avoiding production reduction and cattle mortality due to cold/hot periods;
•	shortage of food;
•	off-farm income opportunities;
•	avoiding parasite infestations and similar; and
•	vacating seasonal grazing land for other animals. 

The territorial boundaries and migration routes of transhumance communities predate national borders defined by states, and in some cases come to overlap the borders of nations. This has given rise to what has recently been termed transborder indigenous migration, defined as “the movement of individuals or families from the same indigenous group within its ancestral territory that straddle [sic] international borders.”  Such a situation arose in Sudan in 2011, in the formation of South Sudan. Transhumance communities living near the new border rely on what is now cross-border movement of cattle. While this is a necessity due to the region’s shifting climates, research has found that transhumance has great potential to generate conflict, making the establishment of a cross-border transhumance management system between the two countries imperative.  In situations like this, project operators can find themselves caught between government agencies in charge of land rights (sometimes in more than one country) and mobile pastoralists utilizing the natural resources of their traditional territories. 

Due to their mobile way of life, transhumance communities are faced with a myriad of challenges unique to their context. Many challenges are similar to those faced by nomadic peoples, but the regularity of transhumance migration entails a difference in vulnerabilities. For example, while nomadic communities have formed their migratory patterns to be adaptable to changing conditions, transhumance communities are fundamentally dependent on the routes they use. Thus, if a transhumance route is blocked off, whether by natural forces or human activity, a community may suffer devastating losses to their livestock.  With the regularity of movements, transhumance communities are also vulnerable to changing social and political conditions, and all the conflicts that ensue.  In many places, such as in Nigeria, transhumance is a changing practice, as pastoralists adapt to changing conditions like increased competition for land and resources, changes in national land management and impacts from development initiatives and projects. 


Case Examples

In many countries across the world, transhumance agro-pastoralist (TAP) forms both a living cultural heritage and one of the main strategies to access natural resources. One such example is Bhutan, where transhumant mobility is necessary to offset potentially high losses due to unpredictable climates.  Bhutan is a special case when it comes to transhumance communities, as the landscape limits the growth of private enterprise as well as the possibilities for intensively mechanized farming. While currently in decline, transhumance pastoralism in Bhutan has thus far proven to be a resilient system.  

There are several project examples of interventions undertaken by international financing institutions to strengthen transhumant livelihoods and communities. While the operation of such projects differs from that of private-sector projects, the successes of many of these projects contain valuable lessons for working with transhumance societies. One example is the Programme d’appui au secteur de l’Elevage (the PASEL Project) in Niger, which began in 1998. This project aimed to secure pastoral mobility and the use of pastoral resources through local level consultation on pastoral land tenure as well as building the social capital of stakeholders.  The lessons learned from this project are instructive for engagement with transhumance communities, as it found, among other things, that addressing pastoral resources should take a territorial development approach involving administrative and customary authorities; that the establishment of a functioning space for intercommunity consultation is crucial to address situations of conflict between mobile and sedentary communities; and that project operators must gain an understanding of the legal pluralism of the transhumance communities’ situation.  

There have been numerous studies into both the economic potentials and the impact on animal health that transhumance pastoralism entails. In West Africa, transhumance pastoralist (and cross-border transhumance in particular) is a dominant economic feature, and has potential to boost regional trade and economic growth.  This potential could provide a fruitful avenue for private-sector projects to explore in the design of social investment programs. Contrasting the idea of expanding and enhancing transhumance pastoralism is the argument that transhumance is bad for animal health. This view is put forth by the Ecole Inter-Etats des Sciences et Médecine Vétérinaires in a study overviewing the socio-economic and animal health impacts of transhumance pastoralism in Africa. The study aims at a better understanding of the impacts related to transhumance, such as major diseases in cattle  and conflicts between mobile and settled farmers , and also evaluates the feasibility of moving pastoralism away from transhumance practices. It concludes that transhumance in many African countries makes up “an integral part of traditional livestock farming methods”, and should be better understood rather than substituted.  


Elements of Good Practice

Transhumance communities often have a deep knowledge of local resource distribution and regional ecology. This could make them key partners in biodiversity conservation efforts and the maintenance of ecological services, which has been suggested in the case of Bhutan. 

With regard to communities relying on transhumance agriculture, the regularity of their seasonal movements makes it possible to map the areas on which they depend. To this end, culturally appropriate engagement strategies should be devised to map transhumance corridors in collaboration with the communities themselves. In many cases, such as in West Africa and the Sahel, organizations have made some headway in mapping such corridors, which in turn facilitates the protection of them. For example, the organization Management of River Systems for the Future has accompanied its mapping process with the concept of a ‘transhumance shed’, defined as “an area serviced by a set of transhumance corridors connecting a sparsely populated pasture area with a heavily populated, cultivated area.”  Innovations like these can be a good way for projects to prevent and mitigate adverse impacts to transhumance communities.

Projects whose activities will likely affect transhumance communities will need to be aware of any social and political friction between them and sedentary societies. Innovative solutions to address conflicts have great potential to harmonize relations between society and affected transhumant stakeholders. For example, improving livestock raising practices and access to water and other pastoral resources has proven quite effective in mitigating conflicts between mobile and settled pastoralists in Chad. 
