## Report: Indigenous Land Borders

### Introduction

The geographical demarcation of indigenous land rights is an issue fraught with controversy. One common assumption is that if a section of land seems to be uninhabited and far away from indigenous communities, then activities on that land should not severely impact such communities. As is to be expected, however, reality is not so simple. For example, nomadic populations leading mobile lifestyles have roamed across loosely defined territories for centuries, and their movements are often not predetermined. Similarly, transhumance communities rely on open stretches of land to move cattle to better pastures during periods of drought. Many isolated Indigenous Peoples also move long distances within their ancestral territories, with varying degrees of regularity. 

When taking these things into consideration, several questions arise: what measures do project operators have at their disposal to accurately define these kinds of areas, so as not to adversely impact communities that do not occupy them all year? If such impacts cannot be avoided, how can projects mitigate and minimize them? What are the implications for a project in cases of cross-border movement of project-affected communities? The aim of this report is to briefly examine these questions using publicly available literature.


Nomadic Communities

Introduction

Nomadic peoples are characterized by frequent mobility within a specific territory, on which their culture, social structures and livelihoods are based. In contrast to transhumance communities (discussed below), the movement patterns of nomadic communities is more random in nature. They can be divided into three general types: 

•	Nomadic hunters and gatherers: Typically organized in small isolated bands moving through a delimited territory.
•	Pastoral nomads: Move with their livestock within an established territory in search of pasture.
•	Tinker or trader nomads: Sell or hire products, or work as laborers (for example, Romani peoples and nomadic horticulturalists). 

Historically, nomadic and other mobile communities across the world have often been considered “backward” or “uncivilized” by governments.  Consequently, nomadic peoples have been the targets of “civilizing” measures, for instance by forcing or incentivizing the settlement of mobile populations.  Another major challenge arising from the differences between mobile and sedentary populations is the expansion of farmlands and the redrawing of state and national borders. Indigenous territories predate the formation of modern states, and as international borders change these territories may become contiguous to or even overlap the new boundaries. This has led to the novel situation wherein mobile indigenous communities cross international boundaries while move within their ancestral territories—a circumstance recently termed “transborder indigenous migration”.  This concept is also relevant in the context of transhumance societies, which we will return to below. 

In international law, the rights and protection of nomadic peoples has become a priority fairly recently. Some organizations like the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) include nomadic groups in their frameworks for the protection of Indigenous Peoples, but there is a general shortage of international frameworks specifically tailored to the rights of nomadic peoples. Where nomadic communities are specifically included, such as in ILO’s Convention 169, key issues identified include the preservation of cultural identity, land rights and access to culturally and linguistically appropriate education.  Nationally, policies for the protection of nomadic peoples vary considerably, as does the accuracy of state mapping of nomadic land usage. As a result, project operators can sometimes find themselves relying on maps stating that land used by nomadic peoples are unoccupied.


Case Examples

Nomadic communities, by virtue of their mobility, are highly dependent on the balance of their environment and pasturelands for their survival, as well as that of their livestock. This means that even good-natured projects run the risk of adversely affecting such communities. One such example is the Pakistan afforestation programs in Malakand Division in the 1980s, which created large areas of land blocked off from communal grazing and blocked off vital transhumance routes.  One of several direct impacts to nomadic communities in such cases is a decrease in herd sizes, which can be catastrophic for the herders and their families. 

As noted, the accuracy of state maps delineating nomadic (and other indigenous) territories vary considerably. Where maps are inaccurate, project operators may end up being granted permission to start activities on land that is actually used by affected stakeholders. Such a situation arose in Krokom Municipality, in northern Sweden, where the municipal government agency granted construction permits to two projects (a ski lift and a wind power station) on lands that turned out to be winter grazing pastures for a Sami village.  In this case, the municipality had failed to inform the semi-nomadic Sami village of Jovnevaerie about the applications, which is required by law. In both cases, project operators were caught in the middle as the municipality failed to uphold its duty to consult. 

A private-sector example of engagement with nomadic peoples is the Oyu Tolgoi (OT) gold mine project in Mongolia, of which Rio Tinto is the main operator. The project has adopted an approach for its design and monitoring framework dubbed ‘standards of acceptable change’.  Key to this approach is collaborating with affected stakeholders to define the limits of change that the community can accept as a result of project activities, and use this as a basis for engagement and mitigation measures. According to Rio Tinto’s own documentation, this approach has been successful, and it is in line with its Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which states that herders expect that the traditional nomadic herding lifestyle will change, but that this is seen as a positive change by most. 

The International Finance Corporation has approved the project’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and resettlement plan for vulnerable groups, including nomadic people. However, the OT Project has been criticized in the media for failing to adequately consult the region’s nomadic communities regarding the impacts of its activities.  In particular, the nomadic herders have expressed worries that the project’s water usage is depleting the water reserves on which they depend. In a reply to the civil society review of the ESIA, the IFC stresses that the affected nomadic herders are not considered Indigenous Peoples under Performance Standard 7 and the World Bank’s OP 4.10. Nomadic herders, the letter states, “represent the mainstream tradition lifestyle in the country and have no distinctive ethnic features from the rest of the population of the country”.  Subsequently, the requirement for free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) does not apply to the OT Project. The question of the nomadic communities’ indigeneity generates a conflict of expectations with regard to what constitutes sufficient community engagement, which is one factor in the opposition experienced by the project. In 2012, nomadic herders in Khanbogd Soum filed a formal complaint to the Compliance Advisory Ombudsman (CAO) alleging that the project’s use of land and water is a threat to their indigenous culture and livelihood. The CAO found that there was room for improvement in the project’s engagement activities, especially in terms of cultural appropriateness.  On the whole, the OT Project is a good example of how a project can run into problems with affected stakeholders in spite of excellent preparation for resettlement of stakeholders away from project areas.


Elements of Good Practice

One of the major challenges for projects affecting nomadic peoples is the general lack or unreliability of available data. As nomadic mobility is random in nature (as opposed to transhumant mobility, discussed below), centralized efforts to map the areas they utilize often fail to do so accurately. For this reason, it is of utmost importance for projects that may affect nomadic peoples to know as much as possible about their specific context, such as the levels of state protection, levels of previous contact with national society, and cultural and social structures.

As previously mentioned, the migration patterns of nomadic communities are relatively random in nature. This complicates the mapping of their territories, and makes participatory mapping and consultation measures one of few effective avenues for defining the areas utilized by nomadic pastoralists. Such measures could include participatory mapping of regularly used land areas  or co-monitoring of impacts to the environment. Project operators should also consider relevant capacity-building for the communities to themselves report their movements and circumstances. 

Engagement with nomadic peoples also has to be culturally appropriate and attuned to their mobility. Many successful interventions have made use of mobile and mobile facilities and measures to ensure continual and cost-effective engagement.  To further improve the effectiveness of such activities, methods such as seasonal calendars to map predictable weather patterns, livestock condition and other valuable information can be employed.