…
6. Direct Investments: Supervision
6.1 Purpose and Applicability
6.1.1 This procedure describes the E&S review process during the supervision stage of the IFC project cycle for Direct Investment projects. It covers the period from first disbursement until the project is closed as an IFC investment.  
6.2 Procedure
6.2.1 Supervision includes the following actions and activities:
a. Ensuring that any E&S CODs are met by the client prior to disbursements;
b. Conducting ongoing review of the E&S performance of the investment as per the conditions of the legal agreements;
c. Review of the AMR and Action Plan status report;
d. On-site supervision visits to review project performance;
e. Support to the Transaction Leader in responding to information or client notification of any serious incident or fatality related to the project;
f. Review of the client’s implementation of the Action Plan including any Supplemental Actions;
g. Review of the client’s E&S compliance, including public consultation, disclosure and monitoring requirements;
h. Review of the project’s performance with reference to the project performance indicators and Monitorable Impacts;
i. Generation of Environmental and Social Risk Rating (ESRR);
j. Responding to any inquiries and complaints or requests for information;
k. Providing inputs to Project Supervision Reports (PSRs) and Expanded Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs);
l. Supporting CAO and IEG in the implementation of its work; and
m. Responding to shortfalls in project performance through revised Action Plans and other such actions.  
…
6.2.7 For portfolio projects reviewed under the PSs, review the AMR and record the following information in the ESRD:
a. The client’s performance against the requirements of the investment agreement the IFC PS in general and applicable EHS Guidelines;
b. The status of the client’s implementation of the Action Plan, including any Supplemental Actions;
c. The status of the client’s Environmental and Social Management System
(ESMS);
d. The status of the client’s community engagement process, including ongoing local disclosure of the ESRS and Action Plan content, consultation and any participatory monitoring or reporting obligations;
e. The status of performance, based on the performance indicators as determined in ESRP 3.4.2e;
f. Key performance gaps relating to the client’s performance, the Action Plan including Supplemental Actions, or ESMS;
g. Key steps the client may need to take to improve its performance;
h. Previous AMR reviews and ESRR scores;
i. Serious incidents to confirm whether they were reported in accordance with the legal agreements and to determine whether a consistent pattern emerges and follow up action is required with the client; and
j. Recommendations that may have been made by CAO and the status of their implementation.

…
6.2.11 Based on the AMR review, submit E&S wording for the PSR to the Portfolio Officer (Annex 6.5.1). Describe any key deficiencies that need corrective action.
6.2.12 Communicate the key deficiencies to the client directly or through the Portfolio Officer, and request corrective action.
6.2.13 In iDesk, update the Monitorable Impacts sections in DOTS.
6.2.14 Determine the need for a supervision site visit based on the ESRR score and the following minimum criteria:
Priority Supervision Field Visit Minimum Frequency
 Category A projects in construction
 Category A projects with ESRR of 3 & 4
 Category B projects with ESRR of 3 & 4
Annual
 Category A projects with ESRR of 1 & 2 Every 2 years
 Category B projects with ESRR 1 & 2 Every 3 years
 Category C projects On risk basis, determined case
by case

---
Other factors that could trigger a supervision mission outside of these criteria above include but may not be limited to reporting delinquencies, a catastrophic incident, NGO complaints, CAO investigations, an XPSR or an IEG visit. If a mission is initiated because of a circumstance such as this, it should be discussed with the Team Leader, Portfolio Officer and Manager CESI. Category C projects do not normally require supervision site visits, but may on a case-by-case basis.
6.2.15 
Conduct a site visit and agree on Supplemental Actions with the client. For Category A projects, the client will retain qualified and experienced external expert(s) to verify its monitoring information. Record the key findings of the supervision visit in the ESRD, referencing the Back to Office report (BTO) or External Expert’s report and update the ESRR score. Provide the ACS staff with updated ESRR score information and the supervision mission date for updating into iDesk and CRD where applicable.
6.2.16 
If the project is being evaluated by IEG and an XPSR is scheduled for this project, provide support to the project team as needed, recording all key findings, decisions, and supporting analysis in the ESRD. Complete this information in the XPSR template for portfolio projects following the WBG Safeguard Policies. Provide XPSR wording to the Portfolio Officer. IEG Guidance on environmental input to the XPSR may be found at htt://ideskintraprod.ifc.org/ifcint/oeg.nsf/Content/XPSR.
6.2.17 
If during the supervision phase of a project, a complaint is filed with and accepted by the CAO, inform the Director CES, the Manager CESI, and the Team Leader. In consultation with the Manager CESI, carry out the following steps:
a. Cooperate with the CAO staff;
b. Communicate the process to the Transaction Leader and the client and keep the client informed of the CAO’s investigation;
c. Once the CAO has drafted a report, ask the Transaction Leader to coordinate with the project team and the client to review the report for accuracy, and to provide further information to the CAO as needed;
d. Submit the draft response and comments to the Manager CESI for review, before it is submitted to the CAO and document this process in the ESRD; and
e. The Transaction Leader should ask the CAO’s office to post the IFC project team’s response to the CAO’s draft report on the CAO’s Web site.
