# Environmental and Social Review Procedures (ESRP) Manual

www.ifc.org/esrp

## Environmental and Social Review Procedures (July 2007) [PDF]

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/90319500488559a3839cd36a6515bb18/ESRP2007.pdf?MOD=AJPERES

INTRODUCTION

…

The ESRP encompass IFC’s review and supervision responsibilities for environmental and social (E&S) performance throughout the investment life cycle. Application of the PS varies according to the client’s business (e.g., industrial companies versus financial institutions) and the nature of IFC’s intervention. The ESRP also describe the application methodology to implement IFC’s institutional disclosure requirements in accordance with the Disclosure Policy.

...

<!--

4.1 Purpose and Applicability
4.2 Procedure
4.2.1
For Category C projects and Rights Issues,
4.2.2
For Category A and B investments,
4.2.3
For Category A and B investments
4.2.4
The Lead Specialist or the Transaction Leader should submit the ESRS to the
client for review
4.2.5
If there are other multilateral investors,
4.2.6
Submit the client-approved Category A and B ESRS for approval to the Team
Leader before it is submitted for disclosure.
4.2.7
Disclose the ESRS at the InfoShop
4.2.8
Verify that the client has disclosed material locally
4.2.9
Disclosure of the SPI and the ESRS
4.2.10
Where there are any inquiries or complaints raised during the disclosure
period,
4.2.11
Additional material may be added to the public release for a project at any
time during the life of IFC’s investment
4.2.12
Vice President (VP) Industry may issue a waiver of the required time period
for disclosure of the SPI and the ESRS
4.2.13
Customize for the client a draft template for the S&E Annual Monitoring
Report (AMR)
4.2.14
The Transaction Leader should ensure that the AMR is included in the legal
agreements.
4.2.15
… Lead Specialist will document an alternative
approach to supervision of such projects that will be cleared in the ESRD by the Manager
CESIG.
4.2.16
Prepare the ESCM
4.2.18 
Enter Development Impact indicators in DOTS
4.2.19
Provide input to the drafting of legal agreements
4.2.20
Environmental and Social Risk Ratings should not be provided until the first
AMR is provided or the first supervision visit undertaken.


-->


4 DIRECT INVESTMENTS: DISCLOSURE AND COMMITMENT

4.1 Purpose and Applicability

4.1.1
This procedure describes the S&E review process during the negotiation stage
of the IFC project cycle for Direct Investment projects through the signing of the legal
agreements. It covers the following steps:
a. IFC’s public disclosure of the SPI and the ESRS prior to Board/Management
Approval;
b. Input for the drafting of legal agreements; and
c. Response to comments and inquiries during the IFC disclosure period prior to
Board consideration of the investment.

4.2 Procedure

4.2.1
For Category C projects and Rights Issues, there is no ESRS or ESCM.
Provide to the Transaction Leader the rationale for the categorization to be included in
the SPI.

4.2.2
For Category A and B investments, prepare the draft ESRS and provide
wording for the SPI to the Transaction Leader as per Annex 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 respectively,
based on the analysis recorded in the ESRD and in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure
Policy. Where a project has to carry out Supplemental Actions, these actions will be
described and form part of the ESRS. In cases where the client is required to conduct
Free Prior Informed Consultation, the ESRS will make that clear, and the corresponding
SPI will state that IFC will need to determine whether BCS exists.

4.2.3
For Category A and B investments submit the draft ESRS for review by the
Team Leader and the Transaction Leader before it is submitted to the client for review
and approval to release. If the Team Leader is also the Lead Specialist for the project, a
specialist not involved with the project will be nominated to review and approve the
ESRS for Category B projects. For Category A projects, submit the draft ESRS to the
Manager CESIG for review prior to submitting it to the client for review.

4.2.4
The Lead Specialist or the Transaction Leader should submit the ESRS to the
client for review (the Transaction Leader will handle the SPI clearance) and obtain the
client’s written approval to release the ESRS to IFC’s Web site and the InfoShop as per
Annex 4.5.3.

4.2.5
If there are other multilateral investors, including IBRD and MIGA, seek to
ensure coordination among the client’s disclosure requirements, those of IFC and those of
the other investors.

4.2.6
Submit the client-approved Category A and B ESRS for approval to the Team
Leader before it is submitted for disclosure. The Manager CESIG must clear the ESRS
for Category A projects.

4.2.7
Disclose the ESRS at the InfoShop by releasing the ESRS electronically to
IFC’s Web site, including links and attachments to relevant client Project Assessment
Information that is referenced in the ESRS. The client’s Project Assessment
documentation and Action Plan should be attached to the ESRS, with links to the client’s
Web site provided, where available. For category A projects request ACS staff to produce
two CDs of SEIA for submission to Corporate Relations.

4.2.8
Verify that the client has disclosed material locally in an appropriate manner.
Where there are no significant adverse impacts to local communities, and if the project
has not previously disclosed information and if the client does not have an adequate
summary of S&E information in a form suitable for disclosure prepared, the client may
elect to translate the ESRS into the local language(s) removing references to IFC and
disclose it locally along with any other materially relevant information.

4.2.9
Disclosure of the SPI and the ESRS and any supporting documents must occur
for no less than the time shown below prior to consideration of the investment by IFC’s
Board of Directors/Management:
a. Sixty (60) days for Category A projects; and
b. Thirty (30) days for Category B and C projects.

4.2.10
Where there are any inquiries or complaints raised during the disclosure
period, carry out the steps as outlined below:
a. For inquiries raised during the disclosure period that relate to IFC at an
institutional level and to issues that are not social or environmental, the
Transaction Leader should respond to the inquiry. Inquiries that request
information from IFC, along with IFC’s response to the request, must be
logged with Corporate Relations, in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure Policy.
The Transaction Leader is responsible for preparing the response to the
request for information, but may seek guidance from Corporate Relations in
applying IFC’s Disclosure Policy; and
b. Complaints pertaining to social or environmental issues should be
communicated to the Team Leader and the Manager CESIG for further action
in accordance with the IFC Disclosure Policy and for possible referral to the
CAO.

4.2.11
Additional material may be added to the public release for a project at any
time during the life of IFC’s investment. In cases where this is done after the ESRS or
SPI has been released and before Board approval, and that involve new or relevant
information in regard to a Performance Standard that would change the adverse risks or
impacts described in the ESRS, or the anticipated development impacts of the investment,
then the disclosure time (30 or 60 days) will be restarted in accordance with the
Disclosure Policy to achieve a complete disclosure for the required time periods.

4.2.12
Vice President (VP) Industry may issue a waiver of the required time period
for disclosure of the SPI and the ESRS in circumstances where the minimum time period
cannot be met (such as market timing requirements, e.g., participation in an Initial Public
Offering). In such cases, in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure Policy, the VP Industry
will inform the Board of Directors of any such deviation.

4.2.13
Customize for the client a draft template for the S&E Annual Monitoring
Report (AMR) as per Annex 4.5.4 that will be reviewed and agreed with the client.
Tailor the format to address the applicable performance requirements as identified in
Procedure No.3 (Direct Investments: Appraisal). It should also include reporting on the
status of the Action Plan, including any Supplemental Actions, if applicable and DOTS
Monitorable Impacts (see Annex 4.5.5 for guidance). In the event that reporting is
required more frequently than once a year, this should also be agreed with the client.
Where possible IFC’s reporting requirements should take advantage of any other
reporting by the client:
a. Discuss with the client opportunities for publicly available non-financial
reporting and document in the ESRD.

4.2.14
The Transaction Leader should ensure that the AMR is included in the legal
agreements.

4.2.15
For investments in market instruments and equity investments as defined in
Procedure 2.2.2b, and where the transaction structure precludes IFC from obtaining any
special reports such as an AMR, the Lead Specialist will document an alternative
approach to supervision of such projects that will be cleared in the ESRD by the Manager
CESIG.

4.2.16
Prepare the ESCM:
a. For Category B projects as per Annex 4.5.6 and obtain clearance in iDesk
from the Team Leader and copy the Manager CESIG;
b. For Category A projects as per Annex 4.5.6. in coordination with the Team
Leader, and submit to the Manager CESIG for approval before the project is
submitted for Board/Management consideration;
c. In cases where BCS is required, include in the ESCM the recommendations
on the status of BCS and the decision that has been taken; and
d. For projects that have been subject to Peer Review, ensure that the
recommendations contained in the Peer Review Minutes have been taken into
account in the ESCM where relevant.
Prepare S&E wording for the Board Paper:  


a. The E&S section of the Board Paper should describe the significant impacts
and mitigations. Provide support, as necessary, to the project team for project
presentations and briefings to the Board;
b. In cases where BCS is required, the Board Paper should include the
recommendations on the status of BCS and the decision that has been taken;
and
c. Include E&S additionality language where warranted. See annex 4.5.7 for
guidance.

4.2.18
4.2.19
4.2.20
4.3.1
Enter Development Impact indicators in DOTS under Monitorable Impact
Section.
Provide input to the drafting of legal agreements. In addition to a general
covenant requiring client compliance with the IFC PS, provide specific references to the
client’s Action Plan, including any references to specific performance criteria from IFC.
Take note of the following:
a. The client shall not amend the Action Plan in any material respect without the
prior written consent of IFC;
b. The client will be required to provide AMRs, and notify IFC of any serious
incidents or fatalities related to the project;
c. Actions that IFC may support to improve the client’s performance beyond
compliance with the IFC PS are not normally covenanted unless they are
considered to be conditions of IFC’s support; and
d. For investments in market instruments and equity investments, where limited
IFC influence exists, IFC’s participation should be based on alternative means
of ensuring PS compliance (such as side letter agreements) which can provide
an assurance from the Company that for as long as IFC retains any
shareholding, operations will be carried out in accordance with for example,
the Company’s EHS and Community Development Policy and with the IFC
PS and EHS Guidelines. IFC may examine opportunities for exit from the
investment in the event that the project is found to be in non-compliance with
the IFC PS.
Environmental and Social Risk Ratings should not be provided until the first
AMR is provided or the first supervision visit undertaken.
4.3 Responsibilities
The Transaction Leader is responsible for:
a. Ensuring that the team lawyer incorporates the inputs from the Lead Specialist
into the legal agreements;
b. Incorporating the S&E inputs provided by the Lead Specialist into the SPI;
c. Communicating with the client and obtaining the client’s permission to release
the ESRS/SPI publicly;
d. Disclosing the SPI in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure Policy; e. Seeking, where required, a waiver of the disclosure requirements, from VP Industry; and f. Responding to external inquiries.

4.3.2
The Lead Specialist is responsible for:
a. Providing the Transaction Leader with the S&E wording for the SPI;
b. Determining the suitability of social and environmental assessment
documentation for posting on the IFC Web site;
c. Determining whether the client has met the disclosure requirements as per the
IFC PS;
d. Preparing and obtaining clearance from Team Leader for the ESRS for
Category B or from the Manager CESIG for the ESRS for Category A
projects and disclosing it in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure Policy;
e. Obtaining clearance from the Team Leader for the ESCM for Category B
projects or from the Manager CESIG for the ESCM for Category A projects;
f. Supporting the Transaction Leader in responding to external inquiries from
NGOs and other affected stakeholders concerning IFC’s S&E Review;
g. Providing inputs to the Board Paper and legal agreements;
h. Customizing the AMR template based on project impacts including DOTS
Monitorable Impacts and other indicators;
i. Request alternative approach to supervision for investments in market
instruments and equity investments where the transaction structure precludes
IFC from obtaining any special reports; and
j. Entering Development Impact indicators in DOTS under Monitorable Impact
Section.

4.3.3
ACS staff is responsible for:
a. Listing documents reviewed by project team in ESRD and uploading the same
into iDocs; and
b. Producing 2 CDs of the SEIA (for Category A projects) for Corporate
Relations.

4.3.4
The Team Leader is responsible for:
a. Clearing the Category the ESRS and ESCM for Category B projects; and
b. Reviewing Category the ESRS and ESCM for Category A projects.

4.3.5
The Manager CESIG is responsible for approving:
a. The ESRS and ESCM for Category A projects; and
b. Alternative supervision requirements.

4.3.6
The AS officer is responsible for:
a.	N/A.
4.3.7 The Manager of AS is responsible for:
a. N/A.

4.3.8 All AS DFOs and Departments are responsible for:
a. N/A.

4.3.9 The Portfolio Officer is responsible:
a. N/A.

4.3.10 The Portfolio Manager is responsible for:
a. N/A.

4.3.11 The Director CES is responsible for:
a. N/A.

4.3.12 The Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional
Director) is responsible for:
a. N/A.

4.3.13 The VP Industry is responsible for:
a. Waiving disclosure requirements; and
b. Informing the Board of Directors on any waiver of disclosure requirements
.
4.4 Records and Documentation
4.4.1 The ESRS, and the list of Supplemental Actions or the updated Action Plan
filed in iDocs and referenced in the ESRD.

4.4.2 Where required, the client’s Project Assessment documents to be posted on
the IFC Web site, uploaded in iDocs and referenced in the ESRD.

4.4.3 Client letter acknowledging the ESRS to be filed in iDocs and referenced in
the ESRD.

4.4.4 All external stakeholder communications to be filed in iDocs and referenced
in the ESRD.

4.4.5 Board Paper S&E input to be referenced in the ESRD.

4.4.6 Investment Agreement to include the S&E wording referenced in the ESCM.

4.4.7 Project-specific AMR and Action plan where required, filed in iDocs and
referenced in the ESRD.  

4.5 Annexes
4.5.1 ESRS template.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.2 SPI S&E wording for Category A and B projects.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.3 Client ESRS release letter template.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.4 AMR template.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.5 DOTS Monitorable Impacts.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.6 ESCM template Category A and B.
[Link provided for staff]

4.5.7 Guidance on ESHS Additionality.

The Board has requested that IFC improve the presentation of additionality and
development impact in Board documents. The section on additionality should include
environmental and social (E&S) information, where present.

The difference between additionality and role can be thought of as role being what we are
going to be doing while additionality describes what benefits or value added we bring
that an alternative funding source would not bring.

We need to think about E&S additionality in terms of:
• What is the E&S baseline of the client before the IFC intervention and then because
of IFC actions, what is the major expected impact(s) on the E&S performance?
• "What is IFC bringing to the deal that another bank would not be bringing?”

The following guidance is provided to help CESIG specialist determine what aspects of a
project could be considered as "additionality" and which should not be used to support an
additionality case. Not every project will contain E&S additionality. Examples provided
below are not exhaustive but are illustrative.

I.	The type of additionality will vary from project to project but could include:

• projects demonstrating a new practice or set of practices that can be applied across a
sector in a specific country or globally;
• projects that demonstrate a high potential to address a pre-existing (our client is just
entering in to the area and has not cause the existing situation) large community
problem such as HIV-AIDS or an environmental problem such as soil or groundwater
contamination;
• projects where the client has agreed to implement a practice beyond compliance with
the PSs (i.e. receiving certifications beyond our requirements);
• projects where IFC is doing an advisory services project related to the mainstream
investment on an environmental, social, health or safety aspect that goes beyond
compliance with the PSs.

II. Application of Performance Standards as additionality: Application of the PSs
will be viewed as additionality if there is a significant improvement in the baseline
conditions. This improvement should be specifically and clearly articulated.

III. Examples of additionality articulation:

1. Poor articulation:
Design and implementation of the CAP to bring the Company into compliance with IFC
environmental policies.

2. Improved articulation:
Because of IFC’s intervention, the company will conduct detailed coastal surveys to
determine where the most sensitive in-shore and on-shore habitats are located. This
information will then be used to select the most appropriate types of oil spill prevention
and clean up equipment in addition to making sensitivity maps and response equipment
available to all operators in the bay.

3. Poor articulation:
The project will improve performance by lowering emissions to meet PS3.

4. Improved articulation:
Because of IFC’s involvement, the project will reduce SO2 emissions by 20% over the
next two years. SO2 is harmful to the environment and the human population as the
primary component in acid rain.

5. Poor articulation:
Implementing an E&S Management System.

6. Improved articulation:
The client has agreed to design and implement a corporate wide E&S management
system that for the first time will allow the corporation to compare and track E&S
performance statistics across the organization and against key performance indicators.
This system will allow management to track costs, efficiency, reduce waste and transfer
knowledge between plant sites.





…

## 6 DIRECT INVESTMENTS: SUPERVISION


<!--

6 DIRECT INVESTMENTS: SUPERVISION

6.1 Purpose and Applicability

6.1.1
This procedure describes the S&E review process during the supervision stage of the IFC project cycle for Direct Investment projects.

6.2 Procedure

6.2.1
After the legal agreements have been executed and where there are S&E CODs to be completed prior to certain disbursements, obtain requisite information from the Transaction Leader

6.2.2
The Team Leader in conjunction with the Portfolio Manager determines which projects can be supervised and those that cannot be supervised.

6.2.3
Where the Portfolio Officer is requesting an ESRR score for the PSR and the project has not submitted an AMR and a site visit from CES has not been undertaken for over 2 years, prepare PSR language reflecting lack of reporting information

6.2.4
For all AMRs, ensure the following:

6.2.5
For portfolio projects reviewed under the WBG Safeguard Policies which preceded the PS, follow the steps below using the AMR review template in iDocs and the ESRR worksheet

6.2.6
For portfolio projects reviewed under the PSs, review the AMR and record in the ESRD the following information
6.2.7
When the client reports serious incidents or fatalities to IFC, inform the Portfolio Officer and the Manager CESIG and record them in ESRD.

6.2.8
In exceptional circumstances, where an AMR review, supervision visit, or information provided from other sources, indicates that the disclosure of certain nonpublic information would be likely to avert imminent and serious harm to public health or safety, and/or imminent and significant adverse impacts on the environment, immediately inform the client to take suitable action

6.2.9
Review AMR in the ESRD and produce the ESRR and DOTS rating.

6.2.10
Based on the AMR review, submit S&E wording for the PSR to the Portfolio Officer, as per Annex 6.5.1.

6.2.11
Communicate the key deficiencies to the client directly or through the Portfolio Officer, and request corrective action.

6.2.12
Rate the achievement of Monitorable Impacts in DOTS.

6.2.13 Determine the need for a supervision site visit based on the ESRR score and the following minimum criteria:

6.2.14
Conduct a site visit and agree on Supplemental Actions with the client. For Category A projects, the client will retain qualified and experienced external expert(s) to verify its monitoring information.

6.2.15
If the project is being evaluated by IEG and an XPSR is scheduled for this project, provide support to the project team as needed, recording all key findings, decisions, and supporting analysis in the ESRD.

6.2.16
If during the supervision phase of a project, a complaint is filed with and accepted by the CAO, inform the Director CES, the Manager CESIG, and the Team Leader.

6.3 Responsibilities

6.3.1
The Transaction Leader is responsible for:

6.3.2
The Lead Specialist is responsible for:

6.3.3
ACS staff is responsible for:

6.3.4
The Team Leader is responsible for:

6.3.4
The Team Leader is responsible for:

6.3.6
The AS officer is responsible for:

6.3.7
The Manager of AS is responsible for:

6.3.8
All AS DFOs and Departments are responsible for:

6.3.9
The Portfolio Officer is responsible for:

6.3.10
The Portfolio Manager is responsible for:

6.3.11
The Director CES is responsible for:

6.3.12
The Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional Director) is responsible for:

6.3.13
The VP Industry is responsible for:

6.4 Records and Documentation

6.4.1
AMR submitted by client to be filed in iDocs.

6.4.2
AMR review to be recorded in the ESRD.

6.4.2
AMR review to be recorded in the ESRD.

6.4.4
XPSR S&E performance review wording, if required.

6.4.5
Consultant ToR, RFP, and consultant report, if required.

6.4.6
(Optional) Corrective Action documentation.

6.5 Annexes

6.5.1

-->



6.1 Purpose and Applicability

6.1.1
This procedure describes the S&E review process during the supervision stage of the IFC project cycle for Direct Investment projects. It covers the period from first disbursement until the project is closed as an IFC investment. Supervision covers the following steps:
a. Ensuring that any S&E CODs are met by the client prior to the disbursement;
b. Conducting ongoing review of the S&E performance of the investment as per
the conditions of the legal agreements, including:
b.1 Review of the AMR;
b.2 On-site supervision visits to review project performance;
b.3 Support to the Transaction Leader in responding to information or
client notification of any serious incident or fatality related to the
project;
b.4 Review of the client’s implementation of the Action Plan including
any Supplemental Actions;
b.5 Review of the client’s S&E compliance, including public
consultation, disclosure and monitoring requirements;
b.6 Review of the project’s performance with reference to the project
performance indicators and Monitorable Impacts; and
b.7 Generation of Environmental and Social Risk Rating (ESRR).
c. Responding to any inquiries and complaints or requests for information;
d. Providing inputs to Project Supervision Reports (PSRs) and Expanded Project
Supervision Reports (XPSRs);
e. Supporting CAO and IEG in the implementation of its work; and
f. Responding to shortfalls in project performance.

6.2 Procedure

6.2.1
After the legal agreements have been executed and where there are S&E CODs to be completed prior to certain disbursements, obtain requisite information from the Transaction Leader to determine the status of their fulfillment. Inform the Transaction Leader if there are any S&E CODs not complied with, based on the above review. Waivers of S&E CODs and any new CODs negotiated and agreed with the client should be cleared by the Manager CESIG and documented in the ESRD.

6.2.2
The Team Leader in conjunction with the Portfolio Manager determines which projects can be supervised and those that cannot be supervised. A listing of projects that cannot be supervised shall be prepared and submitted to the Manager CESIG along with an explanation of why supervision is not feasible. The ACS will document in the ESRD the reason for waiving supervision. The Portfolio Manager is responsible for having the same documented in the Compliance Tracking System remark section.
Scenarios for waiving supervision could include:
a. Where there is a dispute but it is considered temporary and resolvable by the Transaction Leader the project supervision may be considered for postponement; and
b. Where the dispute is considered either permanent or irresolvable, the project supervision activities may be considered for postponement, suspension or termination.

6.2.3
Where the Portfolio Officer is requesting an ESRR score for the PSR and the project has not submitted an AMR and a site visit from CES has not been undertaken for over 2 years, prepare PSR language reflecting lack of reporting information and assign an ESRR rating of No Opinion Possible (NOP).

6.2.4
For all AMRs, ensure the following:
a. There is an AMR cover sheet produced by the ACS staff;
b. The information provided is adequate. If not, request additional information from the client through the Portfolio Officer. (The ACS staff will log AMR follow up information in iDesk); and
c. The report has been submitted according to the timeframes specified in the legal agreement. If the report has been submitted late, ask the Transaction Leader to communicate the need for timely reporting to the client.

6.2.5
For portfolio projects reviewed under the WBG Safeguard Policies which preceded the PS, follow the steps below using the AMR review template in iDocs and the ESRR worksheet in the CES workspace instead of the ESRD. Review the AMR, focusing on:
a. The client’s performance against the requirements of the investment agreement in particular and the applicable WBG Policies in general;
b. The status of the client’s implementation of the S&E Action Plan;
c. Key steps the client may need to take to improve its performance;
d. Previous AMR reviews and ESRR scores;
e. Serious incidents to confirm whether they were reported in accordance with the legal agreements and to determine whether a consistent pattern emerges and follow up action is required with the client; and
f. Recommendations that may have been made by CAO and the status of their implementation as per Procedure 6.2.16.

6.2.6
For portfolio projects reviewed under the PSs, review the AMR and record in the ESRD the following information:
a. The client’s performance against the requirements of the investment agreement in particular and the IFC PS in general;
b. The status of the client’s implementation of the Action Plan, including any
Supplemental Actions;
c. The status of the client’s SEMS;
d. The status of the client’s community engagement process, including ongoing local disclosure of the Action Plan progress, consultation and any participatory monitoring or reporting obligations;
e. The status of performance, based on the performance indicators as determined
in Procedure 3.4.2e;
f. Key performance gaps relating to the client’s performance, the Action Plan including Supplemental Actions, or SEMS;
g. Key steps the client may need to take to improve its performance;
h. Previous AMR reviews and ESRR scores;
i. Serious incidents to confirm whether they were reported in accordance with the legal agreements and to determine whether a consistent pattern emerges and follow up action is required with the client; and
j. Recommendations that may have been made by CAO and the status of their
implementation as per Procedure 6.2.16. 


6.2.7
When the client reports serious incidents or fatalities to IFC, inform the Portfolio Officer and the Manager CESIG and record them in ESRD. Follow up with the client to ensure that the root cause of the incident is being investigated and appropriate corrective action is taken to prevent recurrence.

6.2.8
In exceptional circumstances, where an AMR review, supervision visit, or information provided from other sources, indicates that the disclosure of certain nonpublic information would be likely to avert imminent and serious harm to public health or safety, and/or imminent and significant adverse impacts on the environment, immediately inform the client to take suitable action and record the findings in the ESRD. In the event that the client is unable to address the matter, inform the Portfolio Officer and consult with the Manager CESIG, and prepare recommendations to the Director CES and the Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional Director) for action in accordance with IFC’s Disclosure Policy.

6.2.9
Review AMR in the ESRD and produce the ESRR and DOTS rating. Where a single AMR covers multiple IFC project numbers, record this in the AMR review. In addition, complete the AMR review sheet and return to the ACS staff for updating iDesk and the Computer Reference Database (CRD). For portfolio projects following previous WBG Safeguard Policies, the ESRR score will be used as a proxy to the DOTS rating.

6.2.10
Based on the AMR review, submit S&E wording for the PSR to the Portfolio Officer, as per Annex 6.5.1. Describe any key deficiencies that need corrective action.

6.2.11
Communicate the key deficiencies to the client directly or through the Portfolio Officer, and request corrective action.

6.2.12
Rate the achievement of Monitorable Impacts in DOTS.

6.2.13 Determine the need for a supervision site visit based on the ESRR score and the following minimum criteria:

Priority Supervision Field Visit Frequency

¾ Category A projects in construction
¾ Category A projects with ESRR of 3 & 4
¾ Category B projects with ESRR of 3 & 4
Annual

¾ Category A projects with ESRR of 1 & 2 Every 2 years

¾ Category B projects with ESRR 1 & 2 Every 3 years


Other factors that could trigger a supervision mission outside of these criteria above include but may not be limited to reporting delinquencies, a catastrophic incident, NGO complaints, CAO investigations, an XPSR or an IEG visit. If a mission is initiated because of a circumstance such as this, it should be discussed with the Team Leader, Portfolio Officer and Manager CESIG. Category C projects do not normally require supervision site visits.

6.2.14
Conduct a site visit and agree on Supplemental Actions with the client. For Category A projects, the client will retain qualified and experienced external expert(s) to verify its monitoring information. Record the key findings of the supervision visit in the ESRD, referencing the BTO or External Expert’s report and update the ESRR score. Provide the ACS staff with updated ESRR score information and the supervision mission date for updating into iDesk and CRD where applicable. In DOTS, enter the Monitorable Impacts and any new issues that would need to be monitored in the future.

6.2.15
If the project is being evaluated by IEG and an XPSR is scheduled for this project, provide support to the project team as needed, recording all key findings, decisions, and supporting analysis in the ESRD. Complete this information in the XPSR template for portfolio projects following the WBG Safeguard Policies. Provide XPSR wording to the Portfolio Officer. Guidance from IEG on environmental input to the XPSR may be found at htt://ideskintraprod.ifc.org/ifcint/oeg.nsf/Content/XPSR.

6.2.16
If during the supervision phase of a project, a complaint is filed with and accepted by the CAO, inform the Director CES, the Manager CESIG, and the Team Leader. In consultation with the Manager CESIG, carry out the following steps:
a. Cooperate with the CAO staff;
b. Communicate the process to the Transaction Leader and the client and keep the client informed of the CAO’s investigation; 
c. Once the CAO has drafted a report, ask the Transaction Leader to coordinate with the project team and the client to review the report for accuracy, and to provide further information to the CAO as needed;
d. Submit the draft response and comments to the Manager CESIG for review, before it is submitted to the CAO and document this process in the ESRD;
e. The Transaction Leader should ask the CAO’s office to post the IFC project team’s response to the CAO’s draft report on the CAO’s Web site; and
f. The Lead Specialist should record the CAO recommendations and the implementation plan in the ESRD. 

6.3 Responsibilities
6.3.1
The Transaction Leader is responsible for:
a. Informing the Lead Specialist of any S&E CODs not complied with.

6.3.2
The Lead Specialist is responsible for:
a. Providing clearance on S&E CODs;
b. Seeking approval from the Manager CESIG to waive CODs or to add new CODs;
c. Reviewing the AMR to determine S&E performance and documenting this in
ESRD;
d. Providing PSR and XPSR S&E wording to the Portfolio Officer;
e. Conducting site visits or retaining a consultant to conduct these on IFC’s behalf and update the ESRR score based on findings from the site visits;
f. Notifying the Portfolio Officer, consulting with the Manager CESIG and making a recommendation to the Director of CES and the Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional Director) in relation to action required in response to exceptional circumstances (paragraph 6.2.7);
g. Notifying the Manager CESIG of major incidents;
h. Notifying the Manager CESIG of complaints accepted by the CAO; and
i. Providing input to the Portfolio Officer for responses to complaints accepted by the CAO.

6.3.3
ACS staff is responsible for:
a. Logging the AMRs in iDesk, producing the AMR cover sheet and distributing it to the Lead Specialist;
b. Updating ESRR score in iDesk and CRD after AMR review completion;
c. Updating the AMR review management field in iDesk;
d. Updating AMR follow up field in iDesk;
e. Entering Supervision data into iDesk;
f. Distributing AMR review to Portfolio Officer, Portfolio Assistant and Team
Leader; and
g. Documenting in the ESRD reasons for waiving supervision. 


6.3.4
The Team Leader is responsible for:
a. Interacting with the Portfolio Manager to determine a supervision plan; and

6.3.5
The Manager CESIG is responsible for:
a. Clearing waiver of S&E CODs;
b. Clearing any new COD’s not in the original documents;
c. Making recommendation to the Director of CES and the Director Investment
Department (and where applicable Regional Director) in relation to action
required in response to exceptional circumstances (paragraph 6.2.7); and
d. Reviewing CES input for responses to CAO investigations.

6.3.6
The AS officer is responsible for:
a. N/A.

6.3.7
The Manager of AS is responsible for:
a. N/A.

6.3.8
All AS DFOs and Departments are responsible for:
a. N/A.

6.3.9
The Portfolio Officer is responsible for:
a. Requesting from the client, obtaining, and providing the AMR to the Lead
Specialist;
b. Communicating to the client any data deficiencies and/or Supplemental
Actions identified by the Lead Specialist;
c. Requesting and incorporating S&E wording into the PSR and XPSR;
d. Notifying the Lead Specialist, the Manager of the Investment Department and
Corporate Relations, as needed, of any incidents;
e. Notifying the client when the CAO has accepted a complaint;
f. Coordinating a project team response to a CAO complaint; and
g. Notifying the Lead Specialist if there is a change in the status of the legal
agreement, including loan prepayment, assignment or sale of the loan to
another party, or change in equity ownership.

6.3.10
The Portfolio Manager is responsible for:
a. Interacting with the Team Leader to determine a supervision plan; and
b. Documenting in the Compliance Tracking System remark section reason for
waving supervision.

6.3.11
The Director CES is responsible for:
a. Making a determination, in conjunction with the Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional Director) if a disclosure should be made because of an exceptional circumstance. 


6.3.12
The Director Investment Department (and where applicable Regional Director) is responsible for:
a. Making a determination, in conjunction with the Director CES, if a disclosure
should be made because of an exceptional circumstance.

6.3.13
The VP Industry is responsible for:
a. N/A.


6.4 Records and Documentation


6.4.1
AMR submitted by client to be filed in iDocs.

6.4.2
AMR review to be recorded in the ESRD.

6.4.3
Where conducted, submit the site visit BTO in ESRD copying project
 file in iDocs.

 6.4.4
XPSR S&E performance review wording, if required.

6.4.5
Consultant ToR, RFP, and consultant report, if required.

6.4.6
(Optional) Corrective Action documentation.


6.5 Annexes

6.5.1
PSR wording
[Link provided for staff]


