# ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES MANUAL [October 2016]

Environment, Social and Governance Department

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d0db8c41-cfb0-45e9-b66a-522c88f270a5/ESRP_Oct2016.pdf?MOD=AJPERES


## ESRP4. DIRECT INVESTMENTS: DISCLOSURE AND COMMITMENT

2.8 Public Interest and Comments during Disclosure: Environmental and social inquiries or comments raised during the IFC disclosure period should be addressed in accordance with Environmental and Social Review Procedures (ESRP) 5: Managing Non-Routine Events in Investment Projects (Rules and Tools - Rules).
…

2.12 Determination of ICP, FPIC, and BCS: In cases where clients are required to engage in a process of Informed Consultation and Participation (ICP), IFC determines whether there is Broad Community Support (BCS) for the business activity by Affected Communities. Broad Community Support is a collection of expressions by Affected Communities, through individuals or their recognized representatives, in support of the proposed business activity. There may be BCS even if some individuals or groups object to the business activity. The LESS will verify that the client has implemented an ICP process. Where assets are known, and the project development timing permits, IFC will disclose a summary of how it made its BCS determination with the ESRS. Where a BCS summary is not available prior to Board approval, the ESRS will be updated with this summary when available. Note that IFC will not routinely update ESRSs to summarise BCS in transactions that are corporate in nature with multiple sub-projects (for additional guidance please check the Guidance Note on “BCS Determination Pre-Board and Post-Board Supervision of ICP Process” in Rules & Tools/Mainstream/Board Review and Approval/Tools). The Manager CESI should be consulted, and the Director CES should be provided with the outcome of the BCS review. Where BCS is confirmed, the Director CES must clear the outcome. The FPIC/BCS process is summarized in the document entitled Review of Evidence of FPIC and BCS (see Rules and Tools – Appraisal Guidance) and then a FPIC/BCS approval memorandum is prepared by the LESS, and approved in writing by CES Director. This memorandum will be uploaded in iDesk.
After Board approval of the business activity, IFC continues to monitor the client’s ICP process as part of its portfolio supervision.
FPIC builds on and expands the process of ICP and will be established through good faith negotiation between the client and the Affected Communities of Indigenous Peoples. For additional guidance, refer to Rules and Tools/Appraisal for Mainstream Projects/ICP, BCS and FPIC Assessment and Approval Guidance, which also serves as accompanying guidance and support for E&S specialists.

2.13 Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) scope and content: The LESS is responsible for preparing and proposing reporting formats to the client to help IFC’s understanding of project E&S performance, compliance with ESAP, compliance with the applicable PS and general and sector-specific EHS Guidelines during the supervision phase. The AMR includes specific mandatory sections, ESAP Status, and any additional information that may be needed to evaluate client’s performance. Refer to AMR Generation Tools (see Rules and Tools).
The AMR scope and content and its required reporting frequency must be discussed and agreed with the client and with the Core Team Lawyer to ensure incorporation of requirements into the Investment Contract. Where feasible, IFC’s reporting requirements should take advantage of any other reporting by the client.
To support this requirement, the LESS shall:

• Prepare AMR reporting formats to ensure early on that the client is fully informed of the of data collection requirements necessary to support thorough and timely reporting; including ESAP Status reporting formats using the Action Plan Tracker Reports function and then transmit them to the iDesk Core Team leader for incorporation into the Investment Contract (generic term referring to Investment, Subscription, Participation, and other Agreements);
• Ensure that the Investment Contract mandates IFC client preparation and transmittal of AMR and clearly defines the frequency; and
• Ensure that the Investment Contract stipulates that the AMR may be changed by the client or by
IFC with mutual agreement because of changed project circumstances or to enhance the content,
clarity of E&S sustainability information reported to IFC.

2.14 Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS) Input: The LESS will provide the investment department with selected DOTS E&S indicators for entry in the DOTS system under the Monitorable Impact Section. See Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS) and Development Effectiveness at IFC (Rules and Tools - Guidance). The LESS should also review any commentary in the Board Paper on E&S Risks and Impacts, Additionality and Developmental Outcome. Where the project team proposes or the project is required to report against mandatory Development Outcome indicators, then the LESS should calculate baseline and target values for these and advise the investment team. 

...

2.16 E&S Input to Investment Contract and Core Team Lawyer Liaison: The LESS will continue the liaison with the iDesk Core Team Lawyer, review current iterations of the Investment Contract, and continue to provide E&S input for the drafting of legal agreements as needed. For those investments where non-standard E&S clauses are required the LESS will consult with the SL. For investments in market instruments and publically traded equity investments, where limited IFC influence or access to information exists because IFC cannot be a preferential shareholder, the LESS should seek alternative means of monitoring the investment such as through Corporate Sustainability or Social Responsibility Reports, etc. to monitor if the Company’s Environmental Management System is consistent with IFC’s PSs.





## ESRP6. DIRECT INVESTMENTS: SUPERVISION

<!--
ESRP6.DIRECTINVESTMENTS:SUPERVISION

1.PurposeandApplicability

2. Procedure

2.1 Supervision Responsibilities:

2.2 Conditions of Disbursement Review:

2.3 AMR Review:

2.3.1 Report AMR Review Conclusions:

2.3.2 AMR Waiver:

2.4 Specialreporting requirements: 

2.5 Recordable Supervision Activity , Supervised Projects, and Supervision Site Visits Plan:

2.6 PreparationforSupervisionSiteVisits:

2.7 Documenting the Supervision Site Visit: 

2.8 Independentsupervision activities

2.9 WaivingSupervisionSiteVisits:

2.10 Update Status of ESAP Tasksin theAction Plan Tracker

2.12 ESIAandThirdPartyMonitoringPost-BoardDisclosure:

2.13 Calculate ESRR(S):

2.14 Update DOTS Indicators and DOTS Rating:

2.15 The Expanded Project Supervision Report:

2.16 Addressing Reporting Gaps:

2.17 PortfolioReview:

2.18 HighRisk List:

3. Responsibilities

3.1 The Portfolio Officer is responsible for:

3.2 TheLESS isresponsiblefor:

3.3 TheCESISector Leadisresponsible for:

3.4 The Regional Team Leader (RTL) isresponsible for:

3.5 The Manager CESI is responsible for:

3.6 CES Quality Assurance isresponsible for:

3.7 The ACS staff isresponsible for:

4. Records and Documentation


-->

<!--
ESRP6. DIRECT INVESTMENTS: SUPERVISION
-->

### 1. Purpose and Applicability

This procedure describes the environmental and social (E&S) review process during the supervision stage of the IFC project cycle for Direct Investment projects. E&S supervision obligations are applicable during the period from Commitment until the IFC investment project is closed.
The purpose of supervision is to obtain information to assess the status of project’s compliance with the PS and other specific E&S requirements agreed at commitment; to assess the current level of E&S risk; to provide advice to clients on how to address critical E&S issues; and to identify opportunities for improvement and good practices that could be applied to similar projects.

### 2. Procedure

2.1 Supervision Responsibilities: Effective E&S supervision entails periodic review of the client’s E&S
compliance with the requirements of the IFC investment contract. Review activities include:
* Review Annual Monitoring Reports (AMRs);
* Undertake Supervision Site Visits (SSVs) – refer to section 2.6;
* Review all other project-related information that may become available including conducting periodic internet search’s on the project; and define any changed project circumstances that were not anticipated in appraisal and that could or do result in adverse E&S risks and/or impacts;
* Establish client’s degree of compliance with all investment conditions such as covenants, Conditions of Disbursement (CODs) prior to all disbursements, side letters, ESAP implementation, etc; Refer to ESAP Status Report Example Format (see Rules and Tools - Document Formats);
* Identify good E&S practices to promote their replication in other projects in the portfolio;
* Identify poorly performing projects and where the client fails to comply with its E&S commitments.
* Advice the client on how to manage E&S project issues.
* Clearly communicate risks and probable consequences of client compliance failures with the
E&S requirements and initiate remedies if the client fails to reestablish compliance.

2.2 Conditions of Disbursement Review: Conditions of Disbursement (COD) may include specific investment contract E&S clauses and/or refer to an enclosed ESAP. After the legal agreements are executed and while disbursement(s) are pending, the LESS shall obtain compliance data from the project to assess fulfillment of E&S COD obligations. If all relevant E&S CODs and ESAP tasks have been completed, the LESS shall amend the ESAP Tracker record, upload the records to iDocs, and inform the TRL/Portfolio Officer of CESI clearance for the disbursement.

If there are incomplete E&S CODs and/or ESAP tasks at the time of disbursement, the LESS shall inform the TRL/Portfolio Officer. If the TRL/Portfolio Officer proposes to waive the COD, and if the LESS is supportive of the waiver, the LESS should document the justification for the waiver and send it to the CESI RTL and Manager CESI. Waivers of E&S CODs and ESAP task completion dates and/or approval of replacement or modified CODs or ESAP task completion dates must be approved in writing by the Manager CESI and documented in IFCDocs and the ESAP Tracker. If the Manager CESI does not approve a proposed waiver or a replacement or modified COD, the LESS will inform the TRL/Portfolio Officer that CESI will not support disbursement until the COD is met.

2.3 AMR Review: The AMR, including a status report for ESAP tasks, is the client’s primary communication channel for reporting E&S performance to IFC. The Investment Department Portfolio Assistant is primarily responsible for logging AMR documents into iDesk. If clients send AMRs directly to the LESS, should send the AMR to the relevant Investment Department Portfolio Assistant for compliance tracking log-in. When the AMR is received in CESI, the CESI Team Administrative Client Support (ACS) is responsible for logging the document into the CESI section of the iDesk timeline, preparing the AMR Review Cover Sheet (see Rules and Tools - Document Formats) that provides instructions for the reviewing specialist, and sending the AMR to the reviewing specialist. AMRs sent directly from the client to the CESI Specialist, in HQ should be given to the CESI Team ACS and when in field offices to the ACS of the Portfolio Unit of the Investment Department.

Before reviewing the AMR, the CESI Specialist should read and understand IFC’s project specific E&S requirements developed during appraisal including the ESAP. Review of the client’s submittal should focus on material compliance with these requirements. E&S requirements are also captured in the Negative and Affirmative Covenants and Reports sections of Investment Contracts.

The review should carefully consider:
* The project’s performance compared to the requirements of Safeguard Policies, IFC’s PSs 2006 or 2012 PSs as applicable; applicable requirements of general and sector-specific EHS Guidelines, environmental assessment-proposed mitigation and management plans;
* The project’s performance compared to the requirements of the ESAP;
* The implementation degree and effectiveness of the project’s Environmental and Social Management System;
* Conclusions and completion status of remedial actions from previous AMR reviews; SSVs; and associated Supervision Environmental and Social Risk Rating (ESRR(S)) ;
* The effectiveness of the client’s grievance mechanism and community engagement;
* When applicable the post-board implementation of ICP process (for further guidance see “BCS Determination Pre and Post Board of ICP Process” in Rules & Tools /Mainstream / Supervision/ Tools/ Project Supervision/ Supervision Guidance and Tools)Reported serious incidents in accordance with Environmental and Social Review Procedure (ESRP) 5: Managing Non-Routine Events in Investment Projects (see Rules and Tools - Rules); and
* All other project-specific E&S reporting requirements defined in the Investment Agreement, side letters or other places.

2.3.1 Report AMR Review Conclusions: Using the AMR Review document (see Rules and Tools - Document Formats) the LESS shall prepare a written record of the AMR review. The review shall:
* Consider carefully the resolution status of issues of noncompliance with PSs and general and sector-specific EHS Guidelines highlighted during the appraisal or previous supervision activities;
* Provide an analysis and interpretation of the meaning of the information;
* Clearly communicate to the TRL and client the conclusions reached from information review, defining the gravity of E&S risk and impacts; and
* Communicate specific mandatory follow-up actions and reporting needs.

The LESS shall calculate an updated ESRR(S) (see section on “Calculate ESRR”). When the ESRR(S) is A/B-3, Partly Unsatisfactory, or A/B-4, Unsatisfactory, the AMR review distribution shall include the Investment Department Portfolio Manager and Manager CESI.

If a single AMR covers multiple IFC project numbers, the LESS shall record this fact in the AMR review. The LESS will also ensure all actions on the AMR Review Cover Sheet are completed, and sign and return to the CESI Team ACS along with the AMR review and ESRR(S) scoresheet.

Updated CRR E&S language is recorded through creation and editing of example text in IFCDocscreated Recordable Supervision Activity (RSA) formats. These include AMR Review, SSV Findings (former BTO), CES Client Meeting & Information Review, or AMR Review and SSV Findings Combined. The most current ESRR(S) score and date are automatically uploaded to the CRR.

2.3.2 AMR Waiver: Waiver of IFC investment contract-mandated E&S Annual Monitoring Reports (AMR) submission is exclusively for extraordinary circumstances. For example, if construction is delayed and the proposed facility has not yet been built; if operations have ceased due to catastrophes such as earthquakes, explosions and the like; and/or other reasons for temporary halt of operations for which there are no operations or data to report. Waivers are granted for limited periods only (e.g. one year). The document entitled Petition for Waiver of E&S Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) should be used to request Manager CESI approval of AMR Waivers (See Rules and Tools, Mainstream Supervision, Tools, Document formats).

2.4 Special reporting requirements: in those circumstances when specific aspects of the project rise significant E&S concerns IFC may request supplemental project information in addition to the AMR and on a quarterly or even monthly basis depending on the nature of the issue and its potential E&S consequences. These special reports will allow IFC to monitor more closely those specific aspects. In these cases additional supervision site visits may be required too.

2.5 Recordable Supervision Activity , Supervised Projects, and Supervision Site Visits Plan:

2.5.1 Recordable Supervision Activity (RSA): Is defined as any E&S specialist activity that results in an assessment of a portfolio project’s E&S performance (e.g. obtaining and reviewing an AMR; conducting a Supervision Site Visit; or participating in a client meeting, stakeholder meeting or conference call) and an updated ESRR score. Written records of RSA activities are to be saved in IFCDocs using the relevant supervision template.

2.5.2 Client Meeting/Teleconference/Supplemental project information: could be alternative supervision resources but they become RSA only if enough information is obtained to update the client ESRR score. In such cases this supervision activity shall be recorded using the template “Client Meeting/Information Review Summary” available in IFCDocs. If the information received does not help to update the ESRR score, it can be saved as a stand-alone project document in IFCDocs if warranted.

2.5.3 Supervised Project: Is defined as a project for which the ESRR score, CRR language and DOTS E&S ratings and indicators have been updated as a result of a Recordable Supervision Activity. All active Category A and B investment projects should be supervised at least once a year. 

2.5.4 Supervision Site Visits (SSV) Plan: CESI RTLs are responsible for proposing a list of projects to be supervised every year at the beginning of the fiscal year (FY) using Portfolio Considerations below. RTLs will finalize the list of targeted projects for the FY following discussion with the respective CESI Specialists, Industry Departments and CES Quality Assurance team and obtain Manager CESI approval for the final SSV Plan. The Plan will constitute the annual target of supervision site visits for that region and will be tracked on a regular basis.

Selection of projects for SSVs shall consider the following selection criteria

FY Supervision Site Visits(SSV),Recordable Supervision Activity (RSA) Selection Criteria

 Portfolio Consideration 

 SSV or Alternative RSA

  1. Knowledge Gap projects 
  * Mandatory SSV; 
  2. Projects with ESRR of 3 or 4 
  * Mandatory SSV; or 
  * If E&S Physical Supervision Detractors* apply, conduct alternative RSA with RTL approval; 3. All other projects * RSA; 
  * SSV Plans shall ensure consideration of the following: 
  Category A and high risk projects 
  Projects with complex ESAPs 
  Projects under construction 
  Projects within the first year of disbursement 

  *E&S Physical Supervision Detractors 

  Justification for removal of projects from the draft SSV Plan may include the following: 
  * Adequate Supervision Information is available from other sources - e.g. independent E&S monitoring reports, assessment reports from other lenders, etc.; 
  * Financial Restructuring underway; 
  * Constrained Engagement Projects: projects for which prospects of a resolution of issues with IFC are very low; and, where IFC leverage is limited; 
  * Excellent Sponsor E&S Capacity and Performance - RSA history confirms this; SSV would add no value (exclusively applicable to Portfolio Consideration 3 All Other Projects); 
  * Other compelling factors discussed and agreed between the LESS and the RTL.

Other factors may dictate SSV frequency, including major E&S incident(s), non-governmental organization (NGO) complaints, Compliance Advisor/Ombudsman Office investigations, an Expanded Project Supervision Report (XPSR), or an Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) visit. Refer to ESRP 5: Managing Non-Routine Events in Investment Projects. If an SSV is proposed because of a circumstance described in ESRP 5, the LESS shall ensure consensus for mission travel among the RTL, TRL or Portfolio Officer, and Manager CESI.

2.6 Preparation for Supervision Site Visits:The LESS shallprepare for and plan the SSVbyreviewing previous RSA records, appraisal-generated documents, including BTO reports, the Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS), the ESRD and ESAP. Additionally, the LESS shall review the client’s performance considering the requirements of the PSs, general and sector-specific EHS Guidelines, any environmental assessment mitigation and/or management plans and the criteria described for AMR reviews in Section 2.3 above. The LESS should ensure that the TRL or Portfolio Manager advises the client in advance of the proposed SSV, the purpose for the SSV, and recommended preparations. The SSV should include interview and discussion with the client and other representatives, document review, and physical inspection of selected facilities and/or activities.

Some IFC investments originally had a debt and an equity investment. Where the debt component is closed the E&S investment debt obligations are no longer applicable; however, if the company is not publically listed there may be E&S requirements tied to the equity investment. If the company is publically listed (refer to ESRP 4, 2.14) there may not be specific E&S requirements. In this case, the LESS should monitor the level of E&S risk posed for IFC. Ideally periodic reviews should be included in the Site Supervision Plan or other supervision formats whereby RSA should be used to evaluate project performance considering IFC’s at-Commitment E&S requirements (if any) and the applicable PSs.

Circumstances permitting, after completing the SSV, the LESS or their designee should have a close out meeting with the client including presentation of findings, conclusions, and recommendations for corrective actions. If ESAP items need to be altered or new ones added, the LESS should try to secure agreement with the client at this time.

2.7 Documenting the Supervision Site Visit: The LESS shall document the SSV, along with key observations and interpretations, findings, and conclusions, through completion of an SSV Findings (former BTO) or AMR Review and SSV Findings Combined format document created in IFCDocs (Rules and Tools - Document Formats). Using the Sponsor Follow-up section of the relevant template, the LESS will highlight any material E&S compliance gaps for the client’s attention. Once the document is completed, it must be filed in the Environmental Plans and Documents Folder of IFCDocs. CESI Specialists are responsible for distributing these reports, which contain the CRR E&S language, to the RTL and the Portfolio Officer along with the updated ESRR(S) (see Rules and Tools - Calculation and Estimation Tools). The LESS shall upload all other relevant E&S documents provided by the client to IFCDocs and will update the project’s DOTS record. Refer to Development Effectiveness at IFC (see Rules and Tools - Guidance).

2.8 Independent supervision activities: When several lenders are financing large and/or complex projects they often agree on hiring E&S consultants to conduct independent supervision activities on their behalf. These consultants regularly visit the project in order to supervise the project’s E&S performance and the progress on implementing the ESAP and they report back to the lenders. Thereafter, lenders follow up on any outstanding issues with the client as necessary. The LESS can rely on this source of supervision information to fulfill his responsibilities in terms of completing IFC’s records and databases (e.g. ESRD, ESAP Tracker, ESRS(S), CES HRL, IFCDocs supervision records, etc).

2.9 Waiving Supervision Site Visits: It may notbe feasible to conduct an SSV for projects selected in accordance with Portfolio Considerations in the FY Supervision Site Visits (SSV), Recordable Supervision Activity (RSA) Selection Criteria table above. In the case of projects listed in the Knowledge Gap, cancelling a planned supervision site visit requires the Manager CESI to be advised why supervision is not feasible using the Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists petition format (refer to Annex 7 and Rules and Tools - Document Formats). Supervision visits to projects that are not listed in the Knowledge Gap can be cancelled without a formal waiver but in order to reach the site supervision target they should be replaced with an alternative project supervision site visit.

2.9.1 Justifications for Waiving SSVs May Include:
* In the case of a dispute considered temporary and resolvable by the TRL/Portfolio Manager, the project supervision may be considered for postponement;
* In the case of a dispute considered permanent or irresolvable, an SSV may be postponed, suspended, or terminated; and
* Staff security and safety considerations.

2.9.2 Management Approval for SSV Waivers:
* The LESS will complete a Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists petition format (see Annex 7 and Rules and Tools - Document Formats) describing the reason for the proposed supervision waiver;
*  Obtain signature approval from the Manager CESI;
* Upload signed waiver to iDocs;
* Transmit approved waiver to Quality Assurance and to TRL;
* Quality Assurance will remove the project from current Fiscal Year Supervision Plan.

2.10 Update Status of ESAP Tasks in the Action Plan Tracker: The 2012 AIP mandates update of the implementation status (e.g. % Complete, Completed, Rescheduled, Cancelled, etc.) of the publicly disclosed ESAP once the project is in IFC’s portfolio for projects that were Board approved after January 1, 2012. The Action Plan Tracker maintains detailed information about ESAP Items status. When the status of all Items (Tasks) in the ESAP has been updated and Submitted, the information may then be published to the IFC Disclosure Website. The LESS selects the Supervision Disclosure option. The system then provides an illustration of the information that will be transmitted to the IFC Disclosure Website.

2.11 Unfulfilled Action Plan: If the client fails to comply with its E&S commitments expressed in the ESAP or legal agreements with IFC, the LESS shall work with the client to bring it back into compliance to the extent feasible and, if the client continues to fail to achieve compliance, shall recommend appropriate remedies for CESI Manager and Investment Department consideration. The project may be listed in the CES High Risk List because of the failure to implement the ESAP.

2.12 ESIA and Third Party Monitoring Post-Board Disclosure: except for those projects with minimal or no E&S risk and/or impacts, the LESS will update the content of project disclosed relevant E&S information as it becomes available through the life of the investment. In particular, disclosing the status of the implementation of the ESAP and any additional ESIA or third-party monitoring reports as applicable (in accordance with the Access to Information Policy Please refer to “ESIA and Third-Party Monitoring Post Board Disclosure” for guidance on the definition of ESIA and third party monitoring reports and which should be disclosed ( filed in Rules & Tools/Mainstream/Supervision/ Tools/ Project Supervision/ Supervision Guidance and Tools).

IFC also encourages clients to make publicly available periodic reports on their environment and social
sustainability performance.

2.13 Calculate ESRR(S): The supervision process requires the calculation of a project’s ESRR(S), which IFC uses as a short-hand measure of project E&S risk. The LESS is responsible for calculation of the ESRR(S) using the ESRR calculation worksheet (Rules and Tools – Calculation and Estimation Tools) as a result of RSAs for projects, after reviewing AMRs, Supervision Site Visits, Client Meetings, stakeholder meetings or conference calls and other RSAs (see refer to 2.4 above).

On the basis of the information gathered, the LESS shall calculate the ESRR(S): A/B1- Excellent; A/B-2- Satisfactory; A/B-3-Partly Unsatisfactory; or A/B-4-Unsatisfactory. If the Supervision Activity does not provide sufficient information to impart confidence of the project’s compliance with at-commitment requirements, then the ESRR(S) score should be at best A/B-3-Partly Unsatisfactory.

The reviewing specialist shall consider if the qualitative review and associated conclusions are consistent with the resulting ESRR(S) score generated using the ESRR spreadsheet. If the score is inconsistent with or contradicts the LESS judgment, he/she shall override the calculated score and record the underlying justification of the revised ESRR score.

IFC’s corporate systems assign ESRR(S) scores at the partner (client) level and not at the project level so if there is more than one investment project in the system with the same client, then the system only accepts one ESRR(S) Score. For original investment projects and repeat investments affecting the same facilities or operations, the most recent ESRR(S) will be reported in the system for this partner (client). For investment projects with the same partner (client) affecting different facilities or operations there may be multiple separate ESRR(S) scores for each of these projects. However, as the system will only accept one ESRR(S) score, the ESRR(S) score entered into the system at the partner (client) level shall reflect the highest risk rating (i.e. least satisfactory) recorded score among the partner’s (client’s) IFC projects. This approach is required to focus IFC and partner (client) attention on resolution of the project issues that led to the higher ESRR(S) score.

On occasion, a Portfolio Officer will request an ESRR(S)score to accompany CRR language, even though recent information on which to base the evaluation is not available. The LESS shall not update the ESRR(S) score or date or CRR language in IFCDocs-created RSA formats without new information.

2.14 Update DOTS Indicators and DOTS Rating: Measuring development results helps IFC to report on our performance to stakeholders. Please refer to the Development Impact at IFC Website (see Rules and Tools – Mainstream Supervision – DOTS Guidance). The DOTS system (Development Outcome Tracking System) uses standard indicators for E&S that are aggregated into results to capture development impact and to facilitate comparison of development effectiveness across regions and industries. To update the status of each project the LESS may access the DOTS View tab in iDesk. Within the menu of DOTS E&S indicators there is a subset named as “CORE” E&S indicators. These indicators are the only ones the LESS is responsible for updating. Other indicators in the E&S menu (without the CORE name on it) are mostly related to CBG projects and are the responsibility of the Portfolio officer. A list of CORE E&S Indicators indicating which ones are mandatory by sector, and those that are subject to public disclosure and detailed definitions for each are located in Rules and Tools (Rules and Tools – Mainstream Supervision – DOTS Guidance). The CORE indicators are mandatory for some defined industry sectors and may not be eliminated without permission from the DEU Department. The LESS is responsible for updating the DOTS E&S Indicators that were established at appraisal; and, updating the DOTS Rating (Environmental and Social Performance) for each portfolio investment project on an annual basis. DOTS updates are required as a part of Recordable Supervision Activities.

2.15 The Expanded Project Supervision Report: The Expanded Project Supervision Report (XPSR) is an annual exercise by the Internal Evaluation Group (IEG) affecting a random sample of IFC projects 5 years after Commitment. The XPSR considers IFC and project performance, anticipated and actual project outcomes, and a review of the quality of IFC appraisal and supervision work. The LESS prepares for the XPSR by reviewing XPSR instructions and reporting template available on IEG’s Intranet site (refer to Expanded Project Supervision Report (XPSR) (see Rules and Tools - Guidance). The specialist should review available historical project records including IDocs and the M/Environment Files/Mainstream Projects drive and iDocs. Based upon this review, the LESS shall assess the project’s long-term E&S performance, including its E&S impacts and mitigation measures; compliance with PS, general and sector-specific EHS Guidelines, and ESAP requirements; client staff responsiveness; and the quality and frequency of the project’s E&S reporting. The LESS will schedule a Supervision Site Visit if necessary to assemble complete, up-to-date project information. After the SSV the LESS will provide input to the project team as needed, recording all key findings, decisions, analysis, and conclusions in the SSV Findings format created and stored in iDesk (see Rules and Tools - Document Formats). The LESS is responsible for distributing the report from iDesk. The LESS will record conclusions of the E&S project review in Project Environmental and Social (E&S) Review (See Rules and Tools – XPSR Guidance) and in the IEG XPSR report template (Expanded Project Supervision Report) (see Rules and Tools – XPSR Guidance); request review and approval from the CESI SL and/or RTL; and, when approved, send the completed XPSR report template to the Portfolio Officer. The LESS will upload the completed XPSR input to IFCDocs.

2.16 Addressing Reporting Gaps:

2.16.1 Late E&S Reporting: CES Quality Assurance (QA) will inform the LESS through the CES Monthly Performance Report about all active portfolio projects for which AMRs have not been received on time, and for which AMR reviews are overdue. RTLs will communicate the lists of overdue AMRs to appropriate Portfolio Managers, who will instruct the Portfolio Officers to obtain the overdue AMRs. RTLs will follow up with individual specialists with respect to AMR reviews that are more than 30 days overdue.

2.16.2 Knowledge Gap: A Knowledge Gap refers to Projects that were disbursed 15 or more months previously that do not yet have an ESRR(S) score; and, projects with an ESRR(S) score older than two years. This definition applies to projects with an existing balance of more than $0, but not to Category C or Special Operations (CSO) Projects.

CES QA will inform CESI Specialists through the CES Monthly Performance Report of Knowledge Gap projects. RTLs, in discussion with SLs, Portfolio Officers and Portfolio Managers, will develop and implement measures to update E&S information, either by requesting an AMR, holding a client meeting or by conducting a SSV.

2.17 PortfoliovReview:vRTL shall note all projects where, following supervision, the ESRR(S) is 3 or 4 - and, projects in the CES High Risk List and the current portfolio distribution among E&S categories. All this information will be reported quarterly to the Portfolio Managers. Quality Assurance provides the support to include this information in the Quaterly Regional Portfolio Review presentations.

2.18 High Risk List: Quarterly, the RTL is responsible for requesting regionally mapped CES Specialists to identify projects that have a high E&S risk and seek concurrence with the respective CESI SL. High E&S risk may be attributed to projects due to significantly adverse E&S impacts, reputational risks to IFC and/or Compliance Advisor Ombudsman (CAO) cases.

Refer to ESRP 10: Environmental and Social High-Risk Projects Listing (see Rules and Tools – Rules – 2012 Sustainability Framework) and to High Risk List (Rules and Tools – CES apps) for further guidance on the identification, listing and updating of HRL projects.

### 3. Responsibilities

3.1 The Portfolio Officer is responsible for:
* Obtaining an update from the client on the status of E&S CODs at first and subsequent disbursements;
* Requesting the AMR from the client;
* Communicating to the client any data deficiencies and/or Supplemental Actions identified by the LESS;
* Requesting and incorporating E&S wording into the CRR and XPSR;

3.2 The LESS is responsible for:
* Assessing and documenting project compliance with IFC’s at-Commitment E&S requirements;
* Documenting project compliance with E&S CODs; Seeking approval from the Manager CESI to waive CODs;
* Managing the AMR review to determine E&S performance and amending documentation in iDesk;
* Create and save Recordable Supervision Activity documents in IFCDocs using the appropriate template, (i.e. either the AMR Review; SSV Findings; AMR and SSV Findings Combined or CES Client Meeting & Information Review)
* Update the project records in ESRD, the ESAP Tracker, the High Risk List and the DOTS system as appropriate.
* Updating the ESRR(S) score based on findings from the AMR Review, SSVs, and other sources of data about client performance and compliance;
* Providing CRR and XPSR E&S wording to the Portfolio Officer;
* Notifying the Portfolio Officer of changed project circumstances.
* Preparing a Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists format for proposed elimination of projects from the SSV Plan;

3.3 The CESI Sector Lead is responsible for:
* Clearance of E&S XPSR conclusions;

3.4 The Regional Team Leader (RTL) is responsible for:
* Using input from CES Quality Assurance and CES Specialists to prepare a risk-based draft Industry Annual Supervision Site Visits (SSV) Plan;
* Using input from the CESI Sector Lead and Regional Portfolio Manager, finalize the Annual Supervision Site Visits Plan.
* Obtaining Manager CESI and Investment Department Portfolio Manager signature approval of the approved Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists format and transmission to the Quality Assurance team and stored in iDesk.
* Ensure delivery of the Annual Supervision Site Visits (SSV) Plan;
* Report and discuss projects with ESRR(S) 3 and 4 scores with Regional Portfolio Managers;
* Review High Risk Project records and inputs;
* Follow up on CES Monthly Performance Report exceptions resolution.

3.5 The Manager CESI is responsible for:
* Clearing or rejecting proposed waivers of E&S CODs;
* Approving proposed Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists that are adequately justified in the memorandum.

3.6 CES Quality Assurance is responsible for:
* Removal of all projects from the draft Annual Supervision Site Visits (SSV) Plan for which approved Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists documents have been generated and stored in IFCDocs;
* Quarterly reporting to the CESI Sector Leads and Regional TLs of AMRs reports overdue to IFC; and
* Quarterly reporting to the CESI Sector Leads and Regional TLs of existing and prospective
Knowledge Gap Projects.

3.7 The ACS staff is responsible for:
* Uploading AMRs into iDocs, producing the AMR Cover Sheet (see Rules and Tools - Document Formats), and distributing the AMR and cover sheet to the LESS;
* Updating the ESRR(S) score and date in iDesk through the Company Reference Database after revision based upon AMR Review, SSV Findings (former BTO), and/or AMR and SSV Findings Combined report completion, or due to other Recordable Supervision Activity or circumstances leading to recalculation of the ESRR(S);
* Ensuring that AMR Review, SSV Findings (former BTO), and/or AMR and SSV Findings
Combined distribution includes the Investment Department Portfolio Manager and Manager
CESI when the ESRR(S) is A/B-3 or A/B-4;
* Assisting the LESS to ensure that the Waiver of Environmental and Social Supervision and Removal from Knowledge Gap and Supervision Lists format is saved in iDesk and transmitted to the Quality Assurance Analyst;
* Updating the AMR review field in iDesk;
* Updating the AMR follow-up field in iDesk;
* Distributing the AMR Review to the Portfolio Officer, Portfolio Assistant, and Regional TLs.

### 4. Records and Documentation

* AMR submitted by the client to be filed in iDocs.
* AMR review record to be filed in iDesk
* ESRR(S) update and input to CRD for all Recordable Supervision Activities (RSA);
* Updated Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS) CORE Environmental and Social (E&S) Indicators established at appraisal; and the Development Outcome Rating (Environmental and Social Performance) for the investment project;
* Storage of SSV Findings (former BTO) or the AMR Review and SSV Findings Combined documents in IFCDocs and ESRD;
* XPSR E&S performance review wording to be filed in IFCDocs.
* Consultant SSV Findings, CES Client Meeting and Information Review or the AMR Review and SSV Findings Combined report, if applicable, and recommended corrective actions for the Industry and Regional TLs.
