1. Involuntary resettlement refers both to physical displacement (relocation or loss of shelter) and to economic displacement (loss of assets or access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or means of livelihood) as a result of project-related land acquisition.1 Resettlement is considered involuntary when affected individuals or communities do not have the right to refuse land acquisition that results in displacement 
Objectives

…

*	To mitigate adverse social and economic impacts from land acquisition or restrictions on affected persons’ use of land by: (i) providing compensation for loss of assets at replacement cost; and (ii) ensuring that resettlement activities are implemented with appropriate disclosure of information, consultation, and the informed participation of those affected
*	To improve or at least restore the livelihoods and standards of living of displaced persons 

…

Paragraph 18 and part of paragraph 20 below apply to displaced persons with no recognizable legal right or claim to the land they occupy.

…

Project Design

7. The client will consider feasible alternative project designs to avoid or at least minimize physical or economic displacement, while balancing environmental, social, and financial costs and benefits. 
Compensation and Benefits for Displaced Persons

8. When displacement cannot be avoided, the client will offer displaced persons and communities compensation for loss of assets at full replacement cost and other assistance6 to help them improve or at least restore their standards of living or livelihoods, as provided in this Performance Standard.
Standards for compensation will be transparent and consistent within the project. Where livelihoods of displaced persons are land-based, or where land is collectively owned, the client will offer land-based compensation, where feasible. 7. The client will provide opportunities to displaced persons and communities to derive appropriate development benefits from the project. 
Consultation

9. Following disclosure of all relevant information, the client will consult with and facilitate the informed participation of affected persons and communities, including host communities, in decision-making processes related to resettlement. Consultation will continue during the implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of compensation payment and resettlement to achieve outcomes that are consistent with the objectives of this Performance Standard.

12. In the case of Type I transactions (acquisition of land rights through the exercise of eminent domain) or Type II transactions (negotiated settlements) that involve the physical displacement of people, the client will develop a resettlement action plan or a resettlement framework based on a Social and Environmental Assessment that covers, at a minimum, the applicable requirements of this Performance Standard regardless of the number of people affected. The plan or framework will be designed to mitigate the negative impacts of displacement, identify development opportunities, and establish the entitlements of all categories of affected persons (including host communities), with particular attention paid to the needs of the poor and the vulnerable (see Performance Standard 1, paragraph 12). The client will document all transactions to acquire land rights, as well as compensation measures and relocation activities. The client will also establish procedures to monitor and evaluate the implementation of resettlement plans and take corrective action as necessary. A resettlement will be considered complete when the adverse impacts of resettlement have been addressed in a manner that is consistent with the objectives stated in the resettlement plan or framework as well as the objectives of this Performance Standard.

13. In the case of Type II transactions (negotiated settlements) involving economic (but not physical) displacement of people, the client will develop procedures to offer to the affected persons and communities compensation and other assistance that meet the objectives of this Performance Standard. The procedures will establish the entitlements of affected persons or communities and will ensure that these are provided in a transparent, consistent, and equitable manner. The implementation of the procedures will be considered complete when affected persons or communities have received compensation and other assistance according to the requirements of this Performance Standard. In cases where affected persons reject compensation offers that meet the requirements of this Performance Standard and, as a result, expropriation or other legal procedures are initiated, the client will explore opportunities to collaborate with the responsible government agency, and if permitted by the agency, play an active role in the resettlement planning, implementation, and monitoring.

Displacement

14. Displaced persons may be classified as persons: (i) who have formal legal rights to the land they occupy; (ii) who do not have formal legal rights to land, but have a claim to land that is recognized or recognizable under the national laws8; or (iii) who have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land they occupy.9 The census will establish the status of the displaced persons.

15. Land acquisition for the project may result in the physical displacement of people as well as their economic displacement. As a result, requirements for both physical displacement and economic displacement may apply. 
Physical Displacement

16. If people living in the project area must move to another location, the client will: (i) offer displaced persons choices among feasible resettlement options, including adequate replacement housing or cash compensation where appropriate; and (ii) provide relocation assistance suited to the needs of each group of displaced persons, with particular attention paid to the needs of the poor and the vulnerable. Alternative housing and/or cash compensation will be made available prior to relocation. New resettlement sites built for displaced persons will offer improved living conditions.

17. In the case of physically displaced persons under paragraph 14 (i) or (ii), the client will offer the choice of replacement property of equal or higher value, equivalent or better characteristics and advantages of location, or cash compensation at full replacement value where appropriate.10

18. In the case of physically displaced persons under paragraph 14 (iii), the client will offer them a choice of options for adequate housing with security of tenure so that they can resettle legally without having to face the risk of forced eviction. Where these displaced persons own and occupy structures, the client will compensate them for the loss of assets other than land, such as dwellings and other improvements to the land, at full replacement cost, provided that these people occupy the project area prior to the cut-off date for eligibility. Compensation in kind will be offered in lieu of cash compensation where feasible. Based on consultation with such displaced persons, the client will provide relocation assistance sufficient for them to restore their standards of living at an adequate alternative site.11 The client is not required to compensate or assist those who encroach on the project area after the cut-off date.

19. Where communities of Indigenous Peoples are to be physically displaced from their communally held traditional or customary lands under use, the client will meet the applicable requirements of this Performance Standard, as well as those of Performance Standard 7 (in particular paragraph 14). 

Economic Displacement

20. If land acquisition for the project causes loss of income or livelihood, regardless of whether or not the affected people are physically displaced, the client will meet the following requirements: 
*	Promptly compensate economically displaced persons for loss of assets or access to assets at full replacement cost
*	In cases where land acquisition affects commercial structures, compensate the affected business owner for the cost of reestablishing commercial activities elsewhere, for lost net income during the period of transition, and for the costs of the transfer and reinstallation of the plant, machinery or other equipment
*	Provide replacement property (e.g., agricultural or commercial sites) of equal or greater value, or cash compensation at full replacement cost where appropriate, to persons with legal rights or claims to land which are recognized or recognizable under the national laws (see paragraph 14 (i) and (ii))
*	Compensate economically displaced persons who are without legally recognizable claims to land (see paragraph 14 (iii)) for lost assets (such as crops, irrigation infrastructure and other improvements made to the land) other than land, at full replacement cost. The client is not required to compensate or assist opportunistic settlers who encroach on the project area after the cut-off date
*	Provide additional targeted assistance (e.g., credit facilities, training, or job opportunities) and opportunities to improve or at least restore their income-earning capacity, production levels, and standards of living to economically displaced persons whose livelihoods or income levels are adversely affected
*	Provide transitional support to economically displaced persons, as necessary, based on a reasonable estimate of the time required to restore their income earning capacity, production levels, and standards of living 


21. Where communities of Indigenous Peoples are economically displaced (but not relocated) as a result of project-related land acquisition, the client will meet the applicable requirements of this Performance Standard, as well as those of Performance Standard 7 (in particular paragraphs 12 and13). 

