Performance Standard 6
Biodiversity Conservation
and Sustainable Natural Resource Management

April 30, 2006



Introduction

1. Performance Standard 6 recognizes that protecting and conserving biodiversity—the variety of
life in all its forms, including genetic, species and ecosystem diversity—and its ability to change and
evolve, is fundamental to sustainable development. The components of biodiversity, as defined in
the Convention on Biological Diversity, include ecosystems and habitats, species and communities,
and genes and genomes, all of which have social, economic, cultural and scientific importance. This
Performance Standard reflects the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity to conserve
biological diversity and promote use of renewable natural resources in a sustainable manner. This
Performance Standard addresses how clients can avoid or mitigate threats to biodiversity arising
from their operations as well as sustainably manage renewable natural resources.

Objectives

ß To protect and conserve biodiversity
ß To promote the sustainable management and use of natural resources through the
adoption of practices that integrate conservation needs and development priorities

Scope of Application

2. The applicability of this Performance Standard is established during the Social and
Environmental Assessment process, while implementation of the actions necessary to meet the
requirements of this Performance Standard is managed through the client’s Social and
Environmental Management System. The assessment and management system requirements are
outlined in Performance Standard 1.

3. Based on the Assessment of risks and impacts and the vulnerability of the biodiversity and the
natural resources present, the requirements of this Performance Standard are applied to projects in
all habitats, whether or not those habitats have been previously disturbed and whether or not they
are legally protected.

Requirements

Protection and Conservation of Biodiversity

4. In order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts to biodiversity in the project’s area of influence
(see Performance Standard 1, paragraph 5), the client will assess the significance of project impacts
on all levels of biodiversity as an integral part of the Social and Environmental Assessment process.
The Assessment will take into account the differing values attached to biodiversity by specific
stakeholders, as well as identify impacts on ecosystem services. The Assessment will focus on the
major threats to biodiversity, which include habitat destruction and invasive alien species. When
requirements of paragraphs 9, 10, or 11 apply, the client will retain qualified and experienced
external experts to assist in conducting the Assessment.

Habitat

5. Habitat destruction is recognized as the major threat to the maintenance of biodiversity.
Habitats can be divided into natural habitats (which are land and water areas where the biological
communities are formed largely by native plant and animal species, and where human activity has
not essentially modified the area’s prim ary ecological functions) and modified habitats (where there

has been apparent alteration of the natural habitat, often with the introduction of alien species of
plants and animals, such as agricultural areas). Both types of habitat can support important
biodiversity at all levels, including endemic or threatened species .

Modified Habitat

6. In areas of modified habitat, the client will exercise care to minimize any conversion or
degradation of such habitat, and will, depending on the nature and scale of the project, identify
opportunities to enhance habitat and protect and conserve biodiversity as part of their operations.

Natural Habitat

7. In areas of natural habitat, the client will not significantly convert or degrade1
such habitat,
unless the following conditions are met:
ß There are no technically and financially feasible alternatives
ß The overall benefits of the project outweigh the costs, including those to the
environment and biodiversity
ß Any conversion or degradation is appropriately mitigated
8. Mitigation measures will be designed to achieve no net loss of biodiversity where feasible, and
may include a combination of actions, such as :
ß Post-operation restoration of habitats
ß Offset of losses through the creation of ecologically comparable area(s) that is
managed for biodiversity2
ß Compensation to direct users of biodiversity
Critical Habitat
9. Critical habitat is a subset of both natural and modified habitat that deserves particular attention.
Critical habitat includes areas with high biodiversity value3
, including habitat required for the survival
of critically endangered or endangered species ;
4
 areas having special significance for endemic or
restricted-range species; sites that are critical for the survival of migratory species; areas supporting
globally significant concentrations or numbers of individuals of congregatory species; areas with
unique assemblages of species or which are associated with key evolutionary processes or provide
key ecosystem services; and areas having biodiversity of significant social, economic or cultural
importance to local communities.

10. In areas of critical habitat, the client will not implement any project activities unless the following
requirements are met:
ß There are no measurable adverse impacts on the ability of the critical habitat to
support the established population of species described in paragraph 9 or the
functions of the critical habitat described in paragraph 9


1
 Significant conversion or degradation is: (i) the elimination or severe diminution of the integrity of a habitat
caused by a major, long-term change in land or water use; or (ii) modification of a habitat that substantially
reduces the habitat’s ability to maintain viable population of its native species.
2
 Clients will respect the ongoing usage of such biodiversity by Indigenous Peoples or traditional communities.
3
 Such as areas that meet the criteria of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) classification.
4
 As defined by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species or as defined in any national legislation.
 
 
 ß There is no reduction in the population of any recognized critically endangered or
endangered species5
ß Any lesser impacts are mitigated in accordance with paragraph 8

Legally protected Areas

11. In circumstances where a proposed project is located within a legally protected area,
6
the client,
in addition to the applicable requirements of paragraph 10 above, will meet the following
requirements :
ß Act in a manner consistent with defined protected area management plans
ß Consult protected area sponsors and managers, local communities , and other key
stakeholders on the proposed project
ß Implement additional programs, as appropriate, to promote and enhance the
conservation aims of the protected area

Invasive Alien Species

12. Intentional or accidental introduction of alien, or non-native, species of flora and fauna into areas
where they are not normally found can be a significant threat to biodiversity, since some alien
species can become invasive, spreading rapidly and out-competing native species.

13. The client will not intentionally introduce any new alien species (not currently established in the
country or region of the project) unless this is carried out in accordance with the existing regulatory
framework for such introduction, if such framework is present, or is subject to a risk assessment (as
part of the client’s Social and Environmental Assessment) to determine the potential for invasive
behavior. The client will not deliberately introduce any alien species with a high risk of invasive
behavior or any known invasive species, and will exercise diligence to prevent accidental or
unintended introductions.

Management and Use of Renewable Natural Resources

14. The client will manage renewable natural resources in a sustainable manner.
7
 Where possible,
the client will demonstrate the sustainable management of the resources through an appropriate
system of independent certification.
8

15. In particular, forests and aquatic systems are principal providers of natural resources, and need
to be managed as specified below.


 
 5
 As defined by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species or as defined in any national legislation.
6
 An area may be designated as legally protected for different purposes. This Performance Standard refers to
areas legally designated for the protection or conservation of biodiversity, including areas proposed by
governments for such designation.
7
 Sustainable resource management is the management of the use, development and protection of resources in a
way, or at a rate, which enables people and communities, including Indigenous Peoples, to provide for their
present social, economic and cultural well-being while also sustaining the potential of those resources to meet the
reasonably foreseeable needs of future generations and safeguarding the life-supporting capacity of air, water
and soil ecosystems.
8
 An appropriate certification system would be one which is independent, cost-effective, based on objective and
measurable performance standards and developed through consultation with relevant stakeholders, such as local
people and communities, indigenous peoples, civil society organizations representing consumer, producer, and
conservation interests. Such a system has fair, transparent, independent decision-making procedures that avoid
conflicts of interest.



Natural and Plantation Forests

16. Clients involved in natural forest harvesting or plantation development will not cause any
conversion or degradation of critical habitat. Where feasible, the client will locate plantation projects
on unforested land or land already converted (excluding land that is converted in anticipation of the
project). In addition, the client will ensure that all natural forests and plantations over which they
have management control are independently certified as meeting performance standards compatible
with internationally accepted principles and criteria for sustainable forest management.9
 Where a
pre-assessment determines that the operation does not yet meet the requirements of such an
independent forest certification system, the client will develop and adhere to a time-bound, phased
action plan for achieving such certification.
Freshwater and Marine Systems

17. Clients involved in the production and harvesting of fish populations or other aquatic species
must demonstrate that their activities are being undertaken in a sustainable manner, through
application of an internationally accepted system of independent certification, if available, or through
appropriate studies carried out in conjunction with the Social and Environmental Assessment
process
