##IFC: Components of an IFC Indigenous Peoples Plan

<table>
<tr><th>Section</th><th>Component</th><th>Component Description</th></tr>
<tr><td></td><td>Annex A: Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)</td><td>The IPP is prepared in a flexible and pragmatic manner, and its level of detail varies depending on the specific project and the nature of the effects to be addressed. In general and where appropriate, an IPP should include the following elements:</td></tr>
<tr><td>a)</td><td>Baseline information (from environmental and social risks and impacts assessment process)</td><td>Summarize relevant baseline information that clearly profiles the Affected Communities, their circumstances and livelihoods, with description and quantification of the natural resources upon which the Indigenous Peoples depend.</td></tr>
<tr><td>b)</td><td>Key Findings: Analysis of Impacts, Risks & Opportunities (from environmental and social risks and impacts assessment process)</td><td>Summarize key findings, analysis of impacts, risks and opportunities and recommended possible measures to mitigate adverse impacts, enhance positive impacts, conserve and manage their natural resource base on a sustainable basis, and achieve sustainable community development.</td></tr>
<tr><td>c)</td><td>Result of Consultations (during environmental and social risks and impacts assessment process) and Future Engagement</td><td>Describe the process of information disclosure, consultation and informed participation and where relevant the FPIC process including GFN and documented agreements, with the Affected Communities of Indigenous Peoples, and how issues raised have been addressed. The consultation framework for future engagement should clearly describe the process for ongoing consultations with, and participation by Indigenous Peoples (including women and men), in the process of implementing and operating the project.</td></tr>
<tr><td>d)</td><td>Avoid, Minimize, and Mitigate Negative Impacts and Enhance Positive Impacts</td><td>Clearly describe the measures agreed to in the process of information disclosure, consultation and informed participation to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential adverse effects on Indigenous Peoples, and to enhance positive impacts. Include appropriate action times that detail the measures to be taken, responsibilities and agreed schedule and for implementation (who, how, where and when) (refer to Performance Standard 1 and Guidance Note 1 for more details of the contents of an Action Plan). Whenever feasible, avoidance or preventative measures should be given primacy over migratory or compensatory measures.</td></tr>
<tr><td>e)</td><td>Community Based Natural Resource Management Component</td><td>Where applicable, focus on the means to ensure continuation of livelihood activities key to the survival of these communities and their traditional and cultural practices. Such livelihood activities may include grazing, hunting, gathering, or artisanal fishing. This component clearly sets out how the natural resources upon which the Affected Communities depend, and the geographically distinct areas and habitats in which they are located, will be conserved, managed and utilized on a sustainable basis.</td></tr>
<tr><td>f)</td><td>Measures to Enhance Opportunities</td><td>Clearly describe measures to enable Indigenous Peoples to take advantage of opportunities brought about by the project, and to conserve and manage on a sustainable basis the utilization of the unique natural resource base upon which they depend. Such opportunities should be culturally appropriate.</td></tr>
<tr><td>g)</td><td>Grievance Mechanism</td><td>Describe appropriate procedures to address grievances by Affected Communities of Indigenous Peoples arising from project implementation and operation. When designing the grievance procedures, the client will take into account the availability of judicial recourse and customary dispute settlement mechanisms among the Indigenous Peoples. Affected Communities (both women and men) must be informed of their rights and the possibilities of administrative and legal recourse or remedies, and any legal aid available to assist them as part of the process of consultation and informed participation. The grievance mechanism should provide for fair, transparent and timely redress of grievances without costs, and if necessary provide for special accommodations for women, youth and the elderly, and other vulnerable groups within the community, to make their complaints.</td></tr>
<tr><td>h)</td><td>Costs, budget, timetable, organizational responsibilities</td><td>Include an appropriate summary of costs of implementation, budget and responsibility for funding, timing of expenditure and organizational responsibilities in managing and administering project funds and expenditures.</td></tr>
<tr><td>i)</td><td>Monitoring, Evaluation & Reporting</td><td>Describe monitoring, evaluation and reporting mechanisms (including responsibilities, frequencies, feedback and corrective action processes). Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms should include arrangements for ongoing information disclosure, consultation and informed participation with the Affected Communities of Indigenous Peoples (both women and men) and for the implementation and funding of any corrective action identified in the evaluation process.</td></tr>
</table>
