In 1990, a central environmental protection agency (_Badan Pengendalian Dampak Lingkungan_, BAPEDAL) separate from the State Ministry of Environment was established, supported by three regional offices with a mandate to improve the enforcement of environmental impact assessment (Analisis Mengenai Dampak Lingkungan, AMDAL) and pollution control. The review and approval of AMDAL documents at this time were handled either by national level sector commissions (Komisi Pusat) or provincial commissions (Komisi Daerah), according to project scale and source of funding.

With the promulgation of the [Environmental Management Act 23 of 1997](http://www.vertic.org/media/National%20Legislation/Indonesia/ID_Law_Environmental_Management.pdf) (_[Undang-Undang No. 23 Tahun 1997 tentang : Pengelolaan Lingkungan Hidup](http://www.dpr.go.id/dokjdih/document/uu/UU_2007_23.pdf)_), further reforms to AMDAL additional regulation became necessary. Under Government Regulation 27 of 1999 the sector commissions were dissolved and consolidated into a single central commission, while the provincial commissions were strengthened. More specific and inclusive provisions for public involvement were introduced, as well as a suite of supporting technical guidelines. However, Government Regulation 27 of 1999 was somewhat ill-timed, failing to sufficiently reflect the broader political changes of the time which led to political and administrative decentralization.<sup>[1]( "World Bank. 2005. Good Practices of Environmental Impact Analysis: Presenting Examples of AMDAL Good Practice Drawn from Five Regions in Indonesia. ")</sup>

Under the current legal framework established by Law 32 of 2009 and Government Regulation 16 of 2015, on Environmental Protection and Management, the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Forestry were merged into the Ministry of Environment and Forestry or _Kementerian Lingkungan Hidup dan Kehutanan_ (MOEF/KLHK). MOEF/KLHK is a central level ministry of the Government of Indonesia and is mandated to look after all issues related to environment and forestry in Indonesia.

The current regulations mandate MOEF to administer governance affairs in environment and forestry to protect and promote a safe and healthy environment; prevent control and abate environmental harm including pollution; ensure conservation and sustainable use of natural resources; and institutionalize environmental assessment process as an integral part of the development planning process. The MOEF mandates also include monitoring the impact of development on the environment, putting in place the necessary controls, regulations and incentives for the private and public sectors to achieve sustainable development through the judicious use of natural resources, coordination of inter-sector programs, the implementation of policies and legislation with regard to the environment.

Subsequently, the newly-merged ministry set up their organization and working mechanism under Ministry Regulation (Permen) LHK 18/Men LHK-II of 2015, which divides the organization as their function. Especially for AMDAL and other prevention measures, they are covered under Directorate General of Forest Planning and Environmental System (_Direktorat Jenderal Planologi dan Tata Lingkungan_, PKTL), whose duties are to administer formulation and implementation of policy in consolidating forest area and arrange environmental sustainability. The Sub-directorate of Application for AMDAL, environmental management and monitoring measures (UKL-UPL), and Environmental Permit under the MOEF Directorate of Prevention for Environmental Impact of Business and Activities are responsible for AMDAL system development and implementation in Indonesia. Although implementation authority has been delegated to district and provincial environment agencies as their authority, the Sub-directorate plays a major role in prevention of environmental impacts at national/central level.
