---
title: project finance
date: 2005-12-3 05:01
category: terminology
tags: equator principles,
slug: project-finance
status: draft
---

<!--
icon: file-code-o
summary:
-->
Project Finance is a method of financing in which the lender looks primarily to the revenues generated by a single Project, both as the source of repayment and as security for the exposure. This type of financing is usually for large, complex and expensive installations that might include, for example, power plants, chemical processing plants, mines, transportation infrastructure, environment, and telecommunications infrastructure. Project Finance may take the form of financing of the construction of a new capital installation, or refinancing of an existing installation, with or without improvements. In such transactions, the lender is usually paid solely or almost exclusively out of the money generated by the contracts for the Project’s output, such as the  electricity sold by a power plant. The client is usually a Special Purpose Entity that is not permitted to perform any function other than developing, owning, and operating the installation. The consequence is that repayment depends primarily on the Project’s cash flow and on the collateral
value of the Project’s assets. For reference go to: “Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards ("Basel II")”, November 2005. Reserve-Based Financing in extractive sectors that is non-recourse and where the proceeds are used to develop one particular reserve (e.g. an oil field or a mine) is considered to be a Project Finance transaction covered under the Equator Principles.

### References

http://www.equator-principles.com/resources/equator_principles_III.pdf
