# Performance Standard 3 <br />Pollution Prevention and Abatement

April 30, 2006 

## Introduction

1. Performance Standard 3 recognizes that increased industrial activity and urbanization often
generate increased levels of pollution to air, water, and land that may threaten people and the
environment at the local, regional, and global level.1
 On the other hand, along with international
trade, pollution prevention and control technologies and practices have become more accessible and
achievable in virtually all parts of the world. This Performance Standard outlines a project approach
to pollution prevention and abatement in line with these internationally disseminated technologies
and practices. In addition, this Performance Standard promotes the private sector’s ability to
integrate such technologies and practices as far as their use is technically and financially feasible
and cost-effective in the context of a project that relies on commercially available skills and
resources.

## Objectives

* To avoid or minimize adverse impacts on human health and the environment by
avoiding or minimizing pollution from project activities
* To promote the reduction of emissions that contribute to climate change

## Scope of Application

2. The applicability of this Performance Standard is established during the Social and
Environmental Assessment process, while implementation of the actions necessary to meet the
requirements of this Performance Standard is managed through the client’s Social and
Environmental Management System. The assessment and management system requirements are
outlined in Performance Standard 1.

## Requirements

### General Requirements

3. During the design, construction, operation and decommissioning of the project (the project lifecycle)
the client will consider ambient conditions and apply pollution prevention and control
technologies and practices (techniques) that are best suited to avoid or, where avoidance is not
feasible, minimize or reduce adverse impacts on human health and the environment while remaining
technically and financially feasible and cost-effective.2
 The project-specific pollution prevention and
control techniques applied during the project life-cycle will be tailored to the hazards and risks
associated with project emissions and consistent with good international industry practice,3
 as 
 
 
 
 1
 For the purposes of this performance standard, the term “pollution” is used to refer to both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants in the solid, liquid, or gaseous forms, and is intended to include other forms such as
nuisance odors, noise, vibration, radiation, electromagnetic energy, and the creation of potential visual impacts
including light.
2
 “Technical feasibility” and “financial feasibility” are defined in Performance Standard 1. “Cost-effectiveness” is
based on the effectiveness of reducing emissions relative to the additional cost required to do so.
3 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence and foresight that would reasonably be
expected from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or
similar circumstances globally. The circumstances that skilled and experienced professionals may find when
evaluating the range of pollution prevention and control techniques available to a project may include, but are not
limited to, varying levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative capacity as well as varying
levels of financial and technical feasibility. 




reflected in various internationally recognized sources , including IFC’s Environmental, Health and
Safety Guidelines (the EHS Guidelines).

Pollution Prevention, Resource Conservation and Energy Efficiency

4. The client will avoid the release of pollutants or, when avoidance is not feasible, minimize or
control the intensity or load of their release. This applies to the release of pollutants due to routine,
non-routine or accidental circumstances with the potential for local, regional, and transboundary
impacts .
4
 In addition, the client should examine and incorporate in its operations resource
conservation and energy efficiency measures, consistent with the principles of cleaner production.
Wastes

5. The client will avoid or minimize the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste
materials as far as practicable. Where waste generation cannot be avoided but has been minimized,
the client will recover and reuse waste; where waste can not be recovered or reused, the client will
treat, destroy, and dispose of it in an environmentally sound manner. If the generated waste is
considered hazardous,5
 the client will explore commercially reasonable alternatives for its
environmentally sound disposal considering the limitations applicable to its transboundary
movement.6
 When waste disposal is conducted by third parties, the client will use contractors that
are reputable and legitimate enterprises licensed by the relevant regulatory agencies.

Hazardous Materials

6. The client will avoid or, when avoidance is not feasible, minimize or control the release of
hazardous materials resulting from their production, transportation, handling, storage and use for
project activities. The client will avoid the manufacture, trade, and use of chemicals and hazardous
materials subject to international bans or phase-outs due to their high toxicity to living organisms,
environmental persistence, potential for bioaccumulation, or potential for depletion of the ozone
layer,
7
 and consider the use of less hazardous substitutes for such chemicals and materials.
 
Emergency Preparedness and Response

7. The client will be prepared to respond to process upset, accidental, and emergency situations in
a manner appropriate to the operational risks and the need to prevent their potential negative
consequences. This preparation will include a plan that addresses the training, resources,
responsibilities, communication, procedures, and other aspects required to effectively respond to
emergencies associated with project hazards. Additional requirements on emergency preparedness
and response are found in paragraph 12 of Performance Standard 4.

Technical Guidance

8. The client will refer to the current version of the EHS Guidelines when evaluating and selecting
pollution prevention and control techniques for the project. These Guidelines contain the
performance levels and measures that are normally acceptable and applicable to projects. When
host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines, clients
will achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures are appropriate in view 




4
 In reference to transboundary pollutants, including those covered under the Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution.
5
 As defined by local legislation or international conventions.
6
 Consistent with the objectives of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes.
7
 Consistent with the objectives of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants and the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Similar considerations will apply to certain World Health
Organization (WHO) classes of pesticides. 




of specific project circumstances, the client will provide full and detailed justification for any proposed
alternatives. This justification will demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is
consistent with the overall requirements of this Performance Standard.

Ambient Considerations

9. To address adverse project impacts on existing ambient conditions,8
the client will: (i) consider a
number of factors, including the finite assimilative capacity9
 of the environment, existing and future
land use, existing ambient conditions, the project’s proximity to ecologically sensitive or protected
areas, and the potential for cumulative impacts with uncertain and irreversible consequences; and (ii)
promote strategies that avoid or, where avoidance is not feasible, minimize or reduce the release of
pollutants, including strategies that contribute to the improvement of ambient conditions when the
project has the potential to constitute a significant source of emissions in an already degraded area.
These strategies include, but are not limited to, evaluation of project location alternatives and
emissions offsets.

Greenhouse Gas Emissions

10. The client will promote the reduction of project-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in a
manner appropriate to the nature and scale of project operations and impacts.

11. During the development or operation of projects that are expected to or currently produce
significant quantities of GHGs,10 the client will quantify direct emissions from the facilities owned or
controlled within the physical project boundary and indirect emissions associated with the off-site
production of power used by the project. Quantification and monitoring of GHG emissions will be
conducted annually in accordance with internationally recognized methodologies.11 In addition, the
client will evaluate technically and financially feasible and cost-effective options to reduce or offset
project-related GHG emissions during the design and operation of the project. These options may
include, but are not limited to, carbon financing, energy efficiency improvement, the use of renewable
energy sources, alterations of project design, emissions offsets, and the adoption of other mitigation
measures such as the reduction of fugitive emissions and the reduction of gas flaring.

Pesticide Use and Management

12. The client will formulate and implement an integrated pest management (IPM) and/or integrated
vector management (IVM) approach for pest management activities. The client’s IPM and IVM
program will entail coordinated use of pest and environmental information along with available pest
control methods, including cultural practices, biological, genetic and, as a last resort, chemical means
to prevent unacceptable levels of pest damage. 




8
 Such as air, surface and groundwater, and soils.
9
 The capacity of the environment for absorbing an incremental load of pollutants while remaining below a
threshold of unacceptable risk to human health and the environment.
10 The significance of a project’s contribution to GHG emissions varies between industry sectors. The threshold
for this Performance Standard is 100,000 tons CO2 equivalent per year for the aggregate emissions of direct
sources and indirect sources associated with purchased electricity for own consumption. This or similar
thresholds will apply to such industry sectors or activities as energy, transport, heavy industry, agriculture,
forestry, and waste management in order to help promote awareness and reduction of emissions.
11 Estimation methodologies are provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), various
international organizations, and relevant host country agencies. 





13. When pest management activities include the use of pesticides, the client will select pesticides
that are low in human toxicity, known to be effective against the target species, and have minimal
effects on non-target species and the environment. When the client selects pesticides, the selection
will be based on whether the pesticides are packaged in safe containers, are clearly labeled for safe
and proper use, and have been manufactured by an entity currently licensed by relevant regulatory
agencies.

14. The client will design its pesticide application regime to minimize damage to natural enemies and
prevent the development of resistance in pests. In addition, pesticides will be handled, stored,
applied, and disposed of in accordance with the Food and Agriculture Organization’s International
Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides or other good international industry
practice.

15. The client will not use products that fall in World Health Organization Recommended
Classification of Pesticides by Hazard Classes Ia (extremely hazardous) and Ib (highly hazardous);
or Class II (moderately hazardous), if the project host country lacks restrictions on distribution and
use of these chemicals, or if they are likely to be accessible to personnel without proper training,
equipment, and facilities to handle, store, apply, and dispose of these products properly.



